---
title: "The Last of the Mohicans Study Guide"
date: 2019-04-06
type: paper
tags: [his, hawkeye, magua, him, uncas]
---
## Last of the Mohicans Study Guide

The Last of the Mohicans takes place in the midst of the French-Indian war. Specifically, it focuses on one battle in a war that lasted for many years. This was the last and most important conflict over French and British possessions in North America. Unlike the earlier wars, which began in Europe and spread to America, this struggle broke out solely in America in 1754, and was not settled until 1763. For this reason, Indian involvement in the conflict was incredibly high.

Territorial rivalries became more intense as the settlements of both countries expanded. The British and French could not agree on the boundaries of Acadia. Disputes also arose over the Great Lakes region and the land around lakes George and Champlain. Most important, both countries claimed the vast area between the Allegheny Mountains and the Mississippi River. In 1749, the French explorer de Bienville traveled through the Ohio River Valley to reinforce France's claim there. The first Ohio Company sent Christopher Gist to survey the same area in 1750. In 1753 the French built a chain of forts along the Allegheny River in Pennsylvania. Lieutenant Governor Robert Dinwiddie of Virginia sent George Washington to the commander of the new forts, protesting against French occupation of the area. But the French refused to leave. In 1754, Washington led a small force of colonial troops to force the French to withdraw. They were attacked and defeated near Fort Duquesne, now Pittsburgh, in the war's first battle. Meanwhile, representatives of seven colonies met in Albany, New York, to plan military action.

The Marquis de Montclam took over the leadership of the French forces in 1756. He led attacks on Fort Oswego and Fort William Henry. The French troops outfought the British and seized both these forts. William Pitt became the political leader of Great Britain in the same year. His leadership gave new life to the British cause, which had been waning. In 1759, the British took the city of Quebec after a short but decisive battle. This marked the real end of the war, although the struggle held out until Montreal was taken a year later. By the terms of the Treaty of Paris, signed in 1763, Great Britain received Canada and most French possessions east of the Mississippi River. The Spanish territory of Florida also went to Great Britain. Spain received all French land west of the Mississippi. France's great American empire was reduced to two islands south of Newfoundland and two islands in the Caribbean. Spain was the only real rival of the British.

# Analysis of Chapters 1-5

## Chapter 1:

## Summary:

There is a war going on in North American between the English and the French. As if the hardships of battle are not enough, the actual wilderness is dangerous and toilsome‹the first test of an army's strength. Hardy colonists on the English side can spend months fighting river rapids.

From the frontiers of Canada to New York, along the Hudson valley, there is a lively picture of cruelty and fierceness. There is a passage made by Lake Champlain the French must master in order to beat the English. For this reason some call it the Holy Lake. All around it are "bloody arenas." It is the third year of war, and Great Britain has been lowered from its formerly proud military character. No one fears them. The colonists fight dutifully; the Indians fight for France. Even those located in towns far from battle are scared. There are two forts, William Henry and Edward. News is received through an Indian runner that Montcalm is moving along the shores of Champlain with a huge army. The British commander Munro, who resides at William Henry, also requests urgent reinforcements. General Webb holds Edward. The troops have hewn a path wide enough for moving an army. It is decided that instead of stopping the march, the British will await and prepare for their approach. Word spreads in the camp that 1500 men are to depart for William Henry.

Drums wake the soldiers out of sleep and propel them into motion. As they leave, there are signs of another departure in front of an unusually large cabin. Commoners gather around to watch the emergence of the inhabitants. Two women and a gentlemen appear, the latter an officer of the army. He is tall and lanky, very well-dressed, with a sky-blue coat, silk vest and a cocked hat. In front of the throng of commoners he examines a group of horses and comments on their merits. His voice has sweet and soft tones. In other towns, they are gathering horses as if for the Ark. The man says that the quality of the horses is as high as those in the Holy Book. He looks upon the Indian runner who brought the news, who stands with "sullen fierceness" and stoicism. A young man conducts the two women to their steeds. Both are young. One has golden hair and bright eyes; she looks upon the army. The other, four or five years older, conceals herself from the gaze of the crowd. The ladies and their attendant bow to Webb, and begin their journey at the rear of the cavalcade. The Indian runner glides by them quickly. The younger girl exclaims surprise. The older girl says nothing, but loosens her veil to look at the Indian with curiosity, pity and horror. She has dark tresses and shining dark eyes.

## Analysis:

Cooper sets the scene in this short chapter. It is important to realize, however, that he does this in a very untraditional way. Instead of simply stating the situation, which would take at most a few paragraphs, and moving into the main story line, he provides us with a wealth of description that substitutes for simple facts. Most of the initial observation of the detached, third-person narrative voice is rooted in the harsh nature of the surroundings. We are told that wilderness of the continent confronts armies before they can face one another. The "toils and dangers" of nature waste time and energy of colonists who might otherwise be considered "hardy." Mountains block paths; lakes have "daring leagues." The environment "offers" few benefits. The author immediately seeks to personify nature as an ephemeral being that has the powers of agency and decision. Nature is practically divine: the waters of a lake are "so limpid as to have been exclusively selected by the Jesuit missionaries." Thus, the lake is "holy." The audience interpretation here is simple‹nature is not something that should be taken on lightly. It is both a theme and a character, who is as strong as any that we will meet in our reading. The author is setting it up to be a major antagonistic force in the novel, and we wonder how well these strangers to the land will fare.

Generally, nature description seems to determine the overall tone of events. Reading this chapter, we are hopeful for this army and interested in where they are going. The sun sets in a "flood of glory." Darkness draws a "veil" around the encampment, as a protective force. The morning sky is bright and soft. While Cooper seems to be cheering on these characters, he does not seem to think very highly of the war itself. He mentions "cold, selfish" policies of European monarchies who "rob the untutored possessors" of their "native right." The British military is referred to as imbecilic. Interestingly enough, the author does not follow up on his accusations/observations with factual evidence. Perhaps this will be provided in the outcome of the story.

Some of the most striking descriptions in the chapter involve singular people. Both the army officer and the Indian runner are extensively detailed to the reader, from clothing to demeanor to presence. Not surprisingly, each provides a marked contrast to the other. The officer's clothing is made of fine material, and dignity rests on his shoulders as he socializes with some of the commoners. The Indian has "savage, repulsive" garments, war-paint on his face, weapons in his hands. In the eye of the narrative voice, he is called a "native." In the eyes of those who look at him, he is a "savage." The disparity between the voices is the author's way of conveying subtle disapproval as to the manner in which the Indians are viewed. We are being introduced to the theme of colonization. Apparently Cooper does not like it, but he pays little attention to it here. It will certainly reappear. The silence of the Indian amongst the excitement of the army's departure is notable. While the officer looks at him in amazement, the Indian regards him with disdain. In some respects there is a role reversal. The air of the Indian is more commanding and threatening than that of the officer. Given the harsh nature that surrounds them, we know who is better suited for battle. The relationship between the army and this Indian is not yet detailed, but it will probably be important. Otherwise, Cooper would not spend so much time on describing him.

The entrance of the two females is unexpected at best. A war is going on, after all. But this is an author's means of creating suspense and moving the story along. Cooper goes to the trouble to mention several differences between these two ladies: hair color, eye color, general manner. It is not clear yet why he does this. However, we must keep the differences in mind for further reading.

## Chapter 2:

## Summary:

Alice, the younger of the two sisters, observes a "spectre" of an Indian beside her and is startled. Heyward tells her that the Indian is a runner for the army, a Canadian who has worked with the Mohawks and was once an enemy to the English, before becoming a friend. He is there to lead the party to Fort William Henry, to Munro, the girls' father. Alice does not trust him. She wants Heyward to speak to the Indian so she can hear his tones. Alice expresses anxiety about traveling in this soldier party, but Cora coldly asks whether they should mistrust the man simply because his skin is dark and his customs different. For this she earns a look of admiration from the Indian.

The journey through the forest is tedious. After some time a colt appears. The ungainly man from the preceding chapter is riding him. Heyward asks him sharply who he seeks in the party. The man replies cheerily that he only desires company in riding to the fort. He is a singing master who has been at Fort Edward for about a week. Heyward is reluctant to let him join the group, but Alice persuades him‹she likes the man, calls him "a disciple of Apollo." She believes that he could he a friend to them if the need arises. Duncan plaintively asks whether she believes he would let those he loved travel by an unsafe path. Cora talks to the man about the art of psalmody. The musician believes the psalms of David exceed all other language in beauty. He gives a vocal sample from his book of music. The Indian speaks to Heyward, who says to Alice that it is best to travel without noise‹therefore the man's chant must be postponed. She flippantly replies that the sound is not pleasing to her ears at all, that Duncan's bass voice interrupted her musings. In the thicket behind the travelers, a human visage appears, "fiercely wild and savage." He begins to trace the steps of the party.

## Analysis:

The outlining of biased European sentiments continues in this chapter. The use of the word "spectre" to describe the Indian runner demonstrates that to a woman like Alice, he is not only foreign but ghostly and frightening. She asks to hear his voice; it seems that she expects to hear something that resembles an animal sound as opposed to a human one. The idea is insulting. It is important to note that Cooper sets up the character of Alice as the anti-Indian: not only is she a soft woman, but she has golden hair, light eyes, and a chattering personality. She is everything that an Indian should not be. In this way she contrasts strongly with her dark-haired, less bubbly sister. The author uses Cora to blur the lines between Europeans and Indians. She looks much more like the runner in coloring. She speaks much more seldom than Alice does in the chapter, but when she does speak, her words are profound. The silence she maintains most of the time appears to be contemplative, like the Indian runner. That she is more willing to trust the Indian credits her as an open-minded person who wants to judge people as individuals, not by race. For this reason she has the admiration of the runner, the author, and the reader.

Still, Alice's lack of trust is intelligent. She may not have a precise reason to mistrust the Indian, but she also does not have a reason to give him her confidence. Her suspicions reveal her to be more clever than Heyward, a man who is supposed to be looking out for the safety of her sister and herself. Blindly he accepts the runner as a guide. Under Alice's nagging he allows the unknown song master to join the group. He is extremely trusting, too trusting for his own good. As they travel, the route is continually described as "intricate" and "tangled." Thus it is apparent that Heyward has no idea where they are, which way they are going. The lack of dialogue between the Indian runner and Duncan lends an ominous feeling to the journey. One clearly has the upper hand over the other.

The addition of the musician is somewhat random with an unclear purpose. Most likely, Cooper's aim is to provide comic relief. We are given no reason thus far as to why this man is inhabiting live war grounds when he is certainly not going to fight. There is not a trace of menace in his demeanor as he rides up to the group with a lopsided saddle and choppy gait. That he is a reverent singer is laughable in light of the perilous situation. The man has an absent-minded air. He picks a most inappropriate time to demonstrate his talents, which apparently are not all that great. In any case, he is very likeable, the most enthusiastic character we have met so far. Clearly the singing master enjoys his life through art. He lends some softness to the stiff travelers.

## Chapter 3:

## Summary:

The authorial voice steps in and switches the scene to one that is two miles west. Two men are lingering by a stream within an hour's journey of Webb's encampment. A canopy of woods spreads over them, trapping the "sultry" heat of an American landscape in July. The sounds of birds and waterfalls mingle, but the sounds are too familiar to be bothersome. One man has red skin and the costume of a woods native. The other has the sunburned complexion of one who has descended from Europeans. Both men are exceedingly muscular and have the rugged look of people who have born hard times. The redskin has almost no clothing. He carries a tomahawk and a knife of English manufacture. The white man has a knife and a rifle, as well as moccasins "fashioned" after Indian shoes. He is a hunter or a scout. The two speak in a language peculiar to those who live between the Hudson and the Potomac. They are discussing fight tactics. The Indian calls the scout Hawkeye. Hawkeye speaks of how he does not approve of many things that other white men do, of how they write in books instead of telling stories in villages. They debate about the truth of the Holy Bible versus the truth of the Indian legends in relation to the mysterious water tides. Hawkeye sees the sources as equally true.

The Indian is "unmixed," and his tribe is the "grandfather of nations." In the past they held the Maguas, also known as Iroquois, at bay with triumphant song. All his family has departed except for Uncas, his son, the last of the Mohicans. Chingachgook is the older Indian. Uncas reappears during this discussion. Chingachgook asks whether the Maguas are in the woods. Uncas says there are two of them hidden. Hawkeye is extremely angry. The men decide to eat first and then worry about fighting. Uncas and Hawkeye slay a deer for supper. Chingachgook hears the horses of white men approaching. He asks Hawkeye to speak to them. The scout hopes they are safe from the Iroquois.

## Analysis:

Cooper makes clear his total authority by use of the authorial voice. He write that "we must use an author's privilege" to consider another scene. He speaks as if the reader is included in this decision, when in fact he is using what is usually termed the "royal we." Cooper obviously has a high opinion of his role as an author. When he openly states that he is switching from speaking about Heyward and the travelers to speaking about Hawkeye and Chingachgook, he demonstrates complete control over commentary and description. This has the effect of putting the reader on the alert. An author who makes such sudden switches in plot is not an objective, unbiased voice. Rather, it will be partial and expressive of opinion at all times. it is certain that Cooper's voice will be very important in the subsequent chapters.

In describing Hawkeye and Chingachgook together, Cooper very subtly portrays the extent of English rule. The Indian has weapons "of English manufacture;" he carries a rifle. Yet he is still painted with his traditional colors. In this man we see a meeting of cultures; he illustrates the effects of colonialism. This is a theme that resurfaces throughout the novel. It is important to note that while his weapons are English, he still maintains the dress and customs of Indians. Thus Chingachgook is not willing to completely assimilate to the culture of his conquerors. Nor would he be able to. Hawkeye, as much as his dress appears Indian, still can only wear moccasins that are "fashioned" after Indian ones. Some of his weapons are Indian, but he does not carry the tomahawk, and the rifle remains his weapon of choice. Much as he may try to assimilate, he is still a white man, and always will be. Hawkeye realizes the difference, which allows the reader to approve of his attempts (which are not clumsy) to be one with his Mohican friends. Had he not seen the impossibility of becoming completely Indian, he would be an annoying character.

The dialogue between the two Indians points to the disparities in diction. Hawkeye's speech is streamlined and direct; his ideas are always clear. Chingachgook, however, speaks in flowery language that relies mainly on nature imagery: he refers to rivers, skies, and animals many times. Whereas the nature setting taunts newcomers such as the English travelers, to the Mohicans and Hawkeye it is comforting and peaceful. Nature is a friend to those who understand and respect it: this is another of Cooper's themes. The argument between the two men, which mostly deals with the meeting of whites and Indians, rattles Hawkeye and arouses anger at some moments, while Chingachgook speaks sternly but is perfectly calm. The different worlds from which these two men come is apparent. When Chingachgook speaks of Uncas as the last of his tribe, he speaks of the end of one world in the face of the new world of the whites, a consequence of white colonization.

## Chapter 4:

## Summary:

The travelers come into sight on the trail. Hawkeye asks who they are. They identify themselves as "friends of the king, believers in religion." They ask how far away they are from Fort William Henry. Hawkeye laughs and tells them they are going precisely the wrong way. Heyward shakes his head and says that the Indian guide of theirs must be lost. Hawkeye says an Indian lost in the woods is an absurd prospect. When Duncan tells them that the guide is of the Huron race, Hawkeye and his companions are immediately alert: they are a thievish people. Heyward contests that the man is now a Mohawk, but the scout and his friends do not believe this. Heyward asks them to take them to whatever fort is nearest. After discerning that the traveling party are not spies of Montcalm, and observing the dishonest, disagreeable looks of the guide, Hawkeye wants to shoot the guide from his vantage point so that he will not be able to follow the party. Heyward does not approve, so the scout lowers his rifle. After talking to his friends, Hawkeye tells Heyward that he must engage the guide in conversation while the two men catch him with "Indian tactics." Duncan agrees. He talks to the guide, who is called Magua and Le Renard Subtil. Magua says he will leave the party if other guides have been found. He mutters to himself about pale-faces being dogs to their women. Heyward casually dismounts to talk to the guide; but as soon as he puts a hand on his arm, Magua strikes him and runs away. Chingachgook, Uncas, and Hawkeye are after him. The rifle fires.

## Analysis:

From the onset it is certain that Hawkeye is much more cunning and wary than the English travelers. The questions he puts forth to test the allegiance of Heyward demonstrate that he is not at all trusting, and in wartime this credits him as sensible and wise. He is a white man, but in living with the Mohicans he has definitely lost some of his whiteness. Heyward acts as a foil to the scout; he is a warrior in the English tradition, which means that he is accomplished in pomp and ceremony involved with "civilized" warfare. He has no clue as to how to deal with a battle that has no rules and guidelines. He also thinks too highly of those he meets. The fact that Magua has purposely led the group astray confirms in the reader's mind the naivete of Duncan. He is well-meaning, but ill-suited for Indian encounters. This is proven when he does not succeed in apprehending Magua‹the Huron is extremely perceptive and knows as soon as he is touched that he is about to be attacked.

The distrust that Hawkeye and the Mohicans feel for Magua from the start sets up what will be the central conflict in the book, more so than the French-Indian war: the clashing between tribes of the Delaware and tribes of the Huron. Notice that the scout can tell from Magua's paint and facial expression that he is not to be trusted. He wants to shoot him, knowing that approaching Magua will alert him to something strange. Still, he heeds Heyward, who feels that Magua might be innocent still, and lets him try to capture Magua himself. While this may appear to be a stupid decision, it is necessary that Hawkeye let Duncan see his own errors, so that he will implicitly trust the foresters. Eventually, Cooper will invite comparison between white and Indian warfare.

The sisters are barely noticed, but Hawkeye spends a moment looking upon their beauty. Right now they are more or less ornamental. The musician is not mentioned at all. Such lack of commentary about these characters indicates the manner in which the author plays with time. A few moments last for a few chapters. We also see that Cooper is not a writer who engages in excess description. He speaks only about the characters concerned with a given plot movement at a given moment.

## Chapter 5:

## Summary:

Duncan starts to join the chase, but he meets the three men almost as soon as he leaves. They see some of Magua's blood on the leaves, but Hawkeye knows he is not dead. Heyward wants to pursue him, but the scout scoffs and says that they would be led into the tomahawks of his companions. He recommends instead that they move as quickly as possible so that they are not found by the Mingoes. Heyward begs them to stay. The men converse in the Delaware language, and decide to help them, provided that they will keep the place which they will see a secret from all men. Duncan agrees. He soothes Cora and Alice. Hawkeye says they must dispose of the horses. The women object, but eventually see the intelligence of the plan. After killing a colt and leading the others astray, the three men pull out a bark canoe and they all begin the journey down the river. They come to a rocky shore with loud, pulsating water, called Glen Falls. The foresters and the travelers disembark and move towards a cave-like area. Duncan asks if he sees any of those called Iroquois. Hawkeye replies that all who do not speak the Delaware/Mohican tongue are Iroquois enemies‹they come from bad blood. He thinks that there might be an enemy hovering about. They hear sounds that seem to indicate that the colt is being eaten by wolves. The musician raises a song about the first-born dying in Egypt. They come to the cave.

## Analysis:

That Magua is able to disappear so suddenly indicates the cunning of Indians in general. Hawkeye once again proves his intelligence when he refuses to run after Magua, for fear of running into his Huron companions. The fact that the foresters decide to remain with the travelers and escort them to safety indicates better than anything else how much the Mohicans differ from the Huron tribe. We are meant to put Hawkeye's friends on a pedestal. Uncas himself states that "such harmless things" cannot be left to such an awful fate by those who call themselves men. Thus, helping the travelers becomes a show of bravery and gallantry, in the European sense of the words. It appears that these Indians have something to prove: that they can be as kind and caring as any white men. This is quite deliberate on Cooper's part. He is determined to blur the line between the European constructions of "white" and "Indian," "civilized" and "savage." The Mohicans behave very nicely by European standards. Still they are looked down upon because they are red men. Herein lies the tension. Readers must mentally challenge the European stereotypes as they read the novel.

The killing of the colt illustrates the basic Indian principle of minimalism. They do not keep what is unnecessary. Horses are a luxury that must be exchanged for time and speed. The women do not understand this completely, but they are smart enough to complain little. The minimalist ideal extends to the nature setting. The foresters use walking and water as the main methods of travel because they are easy and readily available. The journey on the water itself is described as "dangerous" with many "swirling eddies leading to destruction." We might view the river as a symbol of passage throughout the novel. It is used to enter new worlds and circumstances. In this case, once the group disembarks from the canoe, they are in a cave dwelling that is a secret place for the Mohicans. The English people have truly entered a new world by their acquaintance with the foresters. It is a cause for fear and celebration‹perhaps this is why the musician raises a song.

Incidentally, the musician is still referred to as "the stranger." Cooper has not needed to discuss him, so he has remained unnamed. His song is a biblical psalm. Clearly the author will use this character to explore Christian religion in the context of the war and the white-Indian relationships.

# Analysis of Chapters 6-10

## Chapter 6:

## Summary:

Heyward and the sisters are feeling anxious, but the musician seems perfectly at ease. The scout and his friends are lighting a fire. In the light there is an air of "romantic wildness" to Hawkeye. The travelers regard the graceful, powerful Uncas with concern. His features are haughty, his eyes at once terrible and calm. Alice speaks to Duncan, saying that the terrible murders they hear about could not be committed by someone like him. Heyward replies that they must hope the Mohicans match their looks and are friends. Cora languidly expresses gratitude that Duncan is judging the men by character instead of skin color. Hawkeye appears once more to tell them to gather around the fire and start eating supper‹the Mohicans have supplied venison. The cave has two entrances, and two falls surround it. The scout assure the travelers that they are safe here. Uncas tries to attend to the females, which amuses Heyward. Although he serves Alice well, he looks upon Cora more steadily. Chingachgook sits immovable for most of the meal. All three men are constantly vigilant.

At one point, Hawkeye asks the musician to name himself. He is David Gamut, "an unworthy instructor in psalmody." The scout laughs, saying that his long legs are suited for more useful work. But David says this is his calling. Hawkeye asks to hear what he can do. The sisters and the musician sing a psalm. The Mohicans listen with great attention, and Hawkeye's features gradually become relaxed as he remembers a boyhood in the colonies. Tears roll down his cheeks. In the middle of the song a strange cry is heard that none can identify. The foresters investigate, but can find nothing. They recommend that the travelers sleep. Alice is worried about their father. She regrets her selfishness in urging a visit at this time. The strange cry is heard again. Hawkeye stands vigilant.

## Analysis:

European prejudices surface once again as Duncan and Alice look upon Uncas with concern. They see him as "powerful," with eyes both "terrible and calm," and therefore slightly dangerous. It is beyond their comprehension that looks are not always the truest indicator of character. It is interesting that this should be the case, though, since Hawkeye is able to judge Magua accurately by his looks. Why the author gives Hawkeye this leeway is not certain, but it is likely that the scout has hard-earned experience on his side, while the English travelers have probably led very sheltered lives. However, seeing that Uncas has a "noble head" Alice believes that atrocities they hear about cannot be committed by someone like himself. Her conclusion may be correct, but again her method of reasoning is faulty. Cora alone demonstrates sagacity as far as reading Uncas goes‹she says that judging his character by his deeds, which have so far been impeccable, is far more intelligent. Again Cooper sets Cora apart from her fellow travelers. More than anyone else she deserves our respect.

The foresters exhibit a nurturing nature that is very charming. They prepare food for the travelers, and Uncas tries to attend to the ladies in the manner to which they are accustomed. Their behavior in these moments does much to discredit the European stereotypes in the minds of the travelers and the reader. Yet even as they coddle the travelers, they are using the Indian perceptiveness and vision to scan out all entrances to the cave. It is protected by waterfalls and rocks. Again we see the principle of minimalism in action‹use everything that is available in nature to aid in a given quest.

The musician is finally introduced as David Gamut. His conversation with Hawkeye immediately shows how much these two white men differ from one another‹Hawkeye seems to make fun of him when he finds that David cannot use any tools aside from his singing pipe. They are foils to one another, stronger ones than Hawkeye and Duncan. Despite his jokes, the scout has a deep admiration for the musician's art. The singing of David and the women is described as "rich" and it fills every nook and cranny of the cave. It has a transfixing power: the Indians listen with such attention that they appear to be made out of stone, and Hawkeye, most remarkably, allows tears to roll down his face. This is a shock to the reader, who does not expect this show of emotion. It demonstrates, however, that Hawkeye has an appreciation of beauty and art that he probably does not show often. We are told that the song reminds Hawkeye of his colonial boyhood. It is the first time we receive any information about Hawkeye's past; we have no idea how he came as a white man to join the Mohicans. David clearly connects the scout to a past that included religion and churchgoing. Whether his reason for leaving this life will be revealed, we do not know.

Incidentally, this chapter is a good example of how Cooper leaves his reading hanging so as to move his story along more quickly. While reading, it is clear to see that each chapter ends in the middle of an event. We must keep reading to find out the conclusions.

## Chapter 7:

## Summary:

The scout says that David and the ladies may sleep, but that the others will have to stand guard at upon the rock. Cora wonders if this is a trick of the Mingoes. Hawkeye says that he has heard every Indian call, and this one defies his comprehension. All of them leave the close cave and step into a more open land. The cry comes again, from the riverbed. This time in the open air Heyward recognizes it as a horse in agony. The foresters believe that wolves are approaching the terrified animals. The three men urge the travelers to sit quietly in the clearing while they see if they can stop the noise. The sisters fall asleep in one another's arms. The men return and stand guard. When day begins to approach, Hawkeye tells Duncan to wake "the gentle ones" and ready the group for a journey in the canoe. Suddenly there arises a tumult of yells. David is wounded by a rifle shot. They bear his body inside the narrow chasm where the sisters and Duncan sit in fear. The attackers subside, but Hawkeye knows they will return soon with reinforcements. They decide to try and keep the rocky cave until Munro might send help.

Everyone takes cover. Heyward ventures a glance outward to see many foes wading through the ebbing current. Uncas and the scout are extremely calm. Hawkeye says there is no better weapon than a rifle in skilled hands. The savages approach, and meet the scout's fire. He and Duncan chase them with pistols. Hawkeye shouts that they are meeting "a man without a cross." He battles a foe with his hands and manages to grasp his knife and stab him through the heart. Heyward meanwhile also combats with an Indian by hand. Just as he is almost thrown over, Uncas slays the enemy. Heyward is rescued and they join Hawkeye in the cover of the bushes.

## Analysis:

The character of Hawkeye is a good point to examine in this chapter. We see that he takes much pleasure in being the one in control. Although his Mohican friends know the forest better than he, the scout always leads the group. When he is unsure, he definitely consults those who are more learned. Thus the read can excuse his at-times overbearing nature. In some ways the hierarchy is inevitable, as Hawkeye is the only member of the party who can speak both English and Delaware. However, it is clear that Hawkeye thrives on the dependence of others on his leadership skills. Throughout the story he seems to be ordering Uncas around. At times this becomes annoying, but we are to look at the scout as a brave protagonist who like anyone else has character faults. Hawkeye can be seen as a colonial superhero. The travelers and the readers develop expectations for him‹we do not want to think it possible that he can fail at anything.

As strong and hardy as the foresters are, it is crucial to realize that they can be scared, and that Hawkeye is only human. There is a moment of weakness when neither the scout nor the Mohicans can identify the strange sound in the wilderness. Immediately Hawkeye sets up a watch; the movements of the Indians are no longer so deliberate, the speech of Hawkeye is no longer so languid. Their fear is justified‹the forest is their domain, and to feel threatened there by something unearthly should not be possible. They are obviously frightened until Duncan provides the explanation for the noise. Once the mystery is cleared up, the manner of the scout is described as "seriously impressive" without any traces of "unmanly apprehension." The strength of Hawkeye may waver, but he is talented at quickly regrouping his emotions.

Once the battle begins, the actions of Hawkeye are slow and meditated. Even Uncas starts to waste his gunpowder, and is chastised by the scout. He becomes the general, and everyone else obediently follows directions. To the group and to the reader, Hawkeye inspires confidence. Whenever he is questioned, the scout provides a reasonable explanation for his daring actions. He appears to be that daring, though, because he is "a man without a cross," a phrase we might interpret as lack of belief in religion, and subsequently less fear of the unknown. This strange pairing of bravery and agnostic atheism is somewhat warranted. After all, none of the travelers are particularly brave, and they are all highly religious, especially David, who is wounded out of carelessness and cannot participate in the battle at all.

Eventually the battle turns to hand-to-hand combat. This is truly the most Indian way of fighting. The scout is reputed for his marksmanship with the rifle he has named "Kildeer;" but the fact that Hawkeye can beat a Huron on his own terms says much about his Indian nature. Duncan is not nearly that successful, and has to be rescued by Uncas. Again, we see that as Cooper describes battle, little mention is made of the sisters (who constitute an ironic image of peace as they sleep in one another's arms) or of Chingachgook, who are not directly involved in the action of the moment.

## Chapter 8:

## Summary:

The group recuperates a bit as the enemies yell with rage from the outside. Hawkeye says to let them burn their powder. He scolds Uncas for using the rifle ineptly. Heyward interrupts and says that his life was saved by the young Mohican. The two grasp hands in friendship. A shot comes near them. Looking out, they see a savage nestled in the branches of a high oak. Uncas and Hawkeye approach the tree from different angles and fire. The savage laughs tauntingly and shoots once more, knocking the scout's cap from his head. The three foresters discuss a plan of action. They let the savage shoot a bit more. By the time his aim becomes fatal, Hawkeye has crept near enough to shoot him truly. The rifle and the Indian fall from the tree. The savage still grasps branches. His death is slow and agonizing, but the scout will not shoot again‹he wants to conserve ammunition. Uncas goes to the canoe to get the hidden powder, but they find it has been stolen by a Huron, possibly Magua. They are completely trapped. Hawkeye says within an hour the enemies will be in the cave. Cora urges the foresters to escape under water and take a message to their father of the recent events, that they might later be rescued. The Mohicans and the scout hear sense her in words. Uncas says he will stay, but Cora makes him leave. She wants Heyward to follow, but he flatly refuses. The travelers retreat into the deepest recesses of the cavern.

## Analysis:

The nature of friendship is somewhat defined in this chapter. The bonds between the scout and the Mohicans are strong and comfortable. It is easy to see that they work as a team, their movements as well-coordinated as those of a machine. Yet their interactions with one another are not mechanical. Indeed, there is a tremendous amount of affection that underlies the military speech of Hawkeye as he speaks about the numerous times Uncas has saved his life, and he has saved Uncas. "Life is an obligation which friends owe each other in the wilderness." Hawkeye's definition of friendship is revised but accurate. In the forest, friendship does consist of sharing daily lives to the point that one is willing to go to battle for any of his cohorts. Hawkeye, who was not born into the Mohican tribe, would have had to prove his friendship with constant companionship. Everyday that the foresters are together is an affirmation of their commitment to one another.

Cooper also addresses the issue of cruelty in warfare. The moment in which Hawkeye shoots the "savage" out of the tree, it is certain that his death will be agonizing. The description of the death, with its long, drawn out sentences, makes the reader feel how much time the poor man is hanging desperately to the tree. We are alongside the horrorstruck Mohicans, watching but wanting to turn away. The fact that Hawkeye will not shoot him again in an effort to conserve powder indicates that he is, as the cliché goes, tough as nails. There is a struggle inside of him, but prudence wins out. The inner struggle is what allows us to forgive him. Otherwise, he would be plainly cruel.

The impending death causes disparate reactions in the group. The foresters are ready to meet it head on; Chingachgook prepares his garb and speaks for the first time in a while about the triumph of his people over the Huron. Uncas and Hawkeye affirm these sentiments and want to fight. The travelers will hear of no such thing. Certainly this is a cultural difference, but in this case it does the whites justice, for Cora comes upon a plan that might be able to save them and have them rescued. It is most notable that Cooper allows a woman to formulate such a plan, and to exhibit such bravery. Clearly Cora is not of average gentry stock. The reader is meant to admire her deeply; like an Indian, she sees what needs to be done and sets forth to accomplish it, without complaining or crying.

## Chapter 9:

## Summary:

The change in atmosphere, from bustling to quiet, throws Heyward into a dream-like state. He is totally uncertain of their fate. The only sounds he can hear are those of birds. They give him some hope and confidence. David is extremely bewildered, and dreads hearing again the shrieks and cries of war. Heyward leads him into the inner tunnels of the cave. There seem to be no enemies in the vicinity. Duncan expresses dislike with the seemingly easy submission attitude of the foresters. He tells Cora that she is equal to the approaching challenge, and wonders if they can dry the tears of Alice. They sit quietly, and David plays some music on his pipe. He sings a bit, drawing his listeners into reverie. A yell bursts through the silence. There is no prospect of escape‹the travelers can only sit and hide. Cries and yells take possession of the rocks and crags. The savages examine the area, shouting Hawkeye's French name: "La Longue Carabine!" (The Long Rifle) Duncan hopes they will be able to elude the examination. When it seems that all have gone, the sisters begin to quietly rejoice. Before Alice can say anything, her words are frozen and a look of horror is upon her face. Standing on a ledge, looking down in their direction, is Magua. His eyes penetrate the dark and he sees them. Duncan shoots at him, but the attempt is futile. Clamorous yells betray the triumph of the Huron. They are dragged from their hiding place.

## Analysis:

This short chapter contains some very interesting nature imagery. As Duncan looks about the cave, bewildered as to what is going to happen next, a fish-hawk "secure on the topmost branches of a dead pine," surveys the scene and looks for his prey. Meanwhile, the jay bird, who had been muffling his voice, begins to sing. Even though we are not shown the actual capture of the jay by the hawk, we can easily look at these birds and see a parallel to the relationship between the Huron and the travelers. Cooper is telling us that they are going to be captured. It is ironic, however, that Duncan looks at the birds and sees hope. He appears unwilling to accept their fate.

With Hawkeye gone, Heyward takes on the role of protector/leader. He places the sisters in the deepest part of the cave, and has to convince David to follow him. The musician proves himself once more a tragicomical figure when he asserts that he is being punished for his sins and will not go into the recess of the cave. Obviously his religion is more of a hindrance than a help in this situation‹he winds up sitting dazedly for most of the time, when he is not singing. Alice is also not a tremendous help: she cries more often than anything else. Cora alone is a pure model of strength. Heyward does not patronize her with "idle encouragement" because he believes she is suited to deal with hardship. In her own way Cora is warrior, one who leads by example and fights impending danger with quiet and calmness.

During the capture, it is important to note that Hawkeye is the principal target of this attack. The author does not provide an explanation for this, but we can assume that Hawkeye's gun has killed many Huron; he sees them as a "thievish race." The reappearance of Magua is unexpected yet not surprising. It is certain that Cooper is setting him apart to be the main antagonist to Hawkeye's protagonist. This pairing addresses several contests: white vs. Indian, colonizer vs. colonized.

## Chapter 10:

## Summary:

Duncan surveys their captors. They are treating the party respectfully. The savages continue to look in vain for the foresters. Magua eyes the group with quiet satisfaction. Heyward asks him to translate the language of his cohorts. Magua replies that they seek Hawkeye's blood, and his whereabouts. Heyward says he is beyond their reach, having swum down the river. The Huron asks why Duncan did not go; the answer is that only a coward deserts women. He relates that the Mohicans are gone as well. Magua interprets these findings to his comrades. They yell with anger. Duncan calms the sisters, but inwardly is very scared. The savages lead the party to canoes and seat them. They take a short journey down the river. Heyward imagines the agony of Munro, and thinks he is to become a prisoner of Montcalm. He pulls Magua aside for a private conversation, in which Heyward pretends that he is seeing a grand plan of Magua's to deceive his old tribe members who treated him so ill. Duncan tries to have Magua concede to double-cross the tribe by releasing the prisoners, tries to convince him that the foresters and himself only spared his life because they knew of his plans. Magua stops the speech and tells Duncan not to speak until spoken to. He allows Heyward to help the sisters into saddles, while he and David accompany them on foot. As they follow, Cora remembers the words of the scout to leave markers on the trail. She subtly breaks twigs and tries to drop her glove. Her captors see what she does and confound her signs. They look at her threateningly and hold their tomahawks. The entire group reaches a low valley where Magua sits and seems to invite a resting time.

## Analysis:

It is to the credit of Magua and his comrades that they treat the travelers with some modicum of respect. They do not physically violate them in any way‹instead they look to handle their various trinkets. This behavior demonstrates the greediness to which the foresters alluded. Even though the white men are the captives, they still seem to exert some kind of influence over the Huron. Allowing the women to ride on horses demonstrates at least a slight concern for their welfare. The travelers could have been killed immediately. The reader is happy that this is not the case, but nonetheless we are suspicious of the reasoning behind this decision.

This is the first chapter where we start to draw a real character sketch of Magua. Clearly he is very vengeful and duplicitous. Yet there is a moment where he provides a partial explanation for his horrible behavior: "Was it war, when the tired Indian rested at the sugar-tree to taste his corn! Who filled the bushes with creeping enemies! Who drew the knife!" Notice that these are not questions, but simple statements that all have the same answer. Up until now, Cooper has avoided addressing the role of the whites, specifically the English, in tearing apart the peaceful existence of the Indians. Although we are supposed to root for the well-being of the travelers, such sentiments as these expressed by Magua make the whole situation much more complicated. The reader must realize that on some level, the whites in story are being victimized because of their own greedy and cruel dealings with the Indians. Partly they deserve what is happening. Unfortunately, this particular group of travelers has little to do with how Magua and his people have been treated. They are being forced to answer for all other members of their race. This is not just; but Magua's resentment is not unreasonable or unfounded. This Huron chief is also characterized by his ambition and hunger for power. When Heyward tries to dupe him into believing that he should let them go, the reader sees that his appeal to Magua's prowess and his reference to the past wrongs that Magua has suffered do effect the chief somewhat.

Still, Duncan's attempt to trick Magua is both admirable and silly. The reader knows that he is coping with the situation as best he can, but his insistence on "not submitting without a fight" causes him to do foolish, useless things. Heyward still has a superiority complex as far as Indians are concerned. He truly believes that he will turn a warrior of Magua's cunning and skill against his own people that quickly. Again, Cora takes a far more practical view of matters as she tries to leave traces of their trail. Despite the danger that this places upon her, she is more than willing to risk herself for the well-being of her friends.

# Analysis of Chapters 11-15

## Chapter 11:

## Summary:

The party is on a steep, pyramidal hill. The tribe catches a fawn and begins to eat it. Magua sits apart and watches. Heyward joins him and says that Munro will be most gratified to see his daughters before another night passes. Magua coldly asks if he will love them less in the morning than at night. He tells Duncan to get Cora because he wishes to speak to her. When Cora arrives, Magua makes Heyward leave, albeit against his will. Magua tells Cora that he was happy before white men appeared, before his Canadian fathers made him a "rascal." He recalls the whipping punishment made to him by Munro for being a member of a rival tribe. Cora begins to feel nervous that Magua intends some great danger to them. She asks that he purchase wealth by Alice's safety and pour out his malice upon her. Magua's price: that Cora herself consent to be his wife and live in his wigwam. Cora is revolted. She tells Magua that he well deserves his evil name. Magua leaves her to talk to his tribe. Heyward demands to know what was said, but Cora, reluctant to upset Alice, evades a direct reply. In the meantime, Magua is rallying his tribe to fight and find Hawkeye. The warriors turn upon the travelers and bind them, preparing to kill. Magua repeats his offer to Cora, and sneering as he points out Alice's weeping. Cora looks upon her and tells both Duncan and herself of the offer. They are astounded, and refuse to let it be; Alice says it is better to die as they have lived: together. Magua pronounces their death. Some of Alice's ringlets are cut by a tomahawk. Infuriated, Heyward jumps upon him. Before he can meet his death by means of the long knife carried by the Indian, a rifle shot is heard and the savage falls dead.

## Analysis:

The characterization of Magua becomes more complex. We receive an even fuller account of his interactions with the white conquerors. The diction of the author certainly portrays the experience as a forceful one. Comparing himself to a "haunted buffalo," Magua speaks of being made to drink "fire-water" and becoming a "rascal." The nature imagery calls to mind the Mohican heroes. It is clear that at one time, the Huron chief was as pure as his Mohican counterparts. The statements indicate that Magua felt as helpless as a hunted animal might feel, and his conversion to a more evil life is not something in which he takes pride. We feel further sympathy for him when he tells Cora how he was publicly whipped by her father for drinking the fire-water that other white men gave to him. It should not make sense that he is punished for the negative influences which he has experienced, but that is what has happened. Cooper means for us to struggle against a proper judgment for Magua. He is not a character who is easily categorized, which makes him the perfect villain.

Still, the authorial voice itself makes up the reader's mind. Cooper constantly refers to Magua's people as "savages." Magua himself is often called "the Huron." It is important to see that the foresters are never called by insulting, impersonal names, even though they can be extremely cruel, as Hawkeye was when he let the Indian dangle in death from the tree for an extended period of time. The insinuation is that their violence is for a higher purpose, whereas Huron behavior seems mostly profiteering. Thus we cannot think well of Magua and his people, no matter how much we might sympathize with Magua's plight. The reader can look upon him as an instance of colonialism gone wrong. Far from being an asset to the whites who conquered him, Magua is now full of vengeance and evil intentions. We sympathize with our travelers, but again on some level the behavior of this Indian is their own fault.

The Huron chief seals his unpopularity and his evilness to the reader through his horrid marriage proposal to Cora. She has now truly become the tragic heroine of the novel. If we didn't admire her before, we certainly do now. The proposal is nothing more than a means of "legalizing" the rape of a white woman. For Cora plainly says she cannot love Magua‹thus any bed she shares with him would have to be against her wishes. While it is to Magua's credit that he does not try to violate Cora in any way without her consent to live in his wigwam, in some way the plan he meditates is more cruel. To bind her for a lifetime, away from all that she knows and loves. Looking upon her, Magua states that he has the "spirit of the gray-head in his hand." The Huron chief is not foolish‹he knows the bond that exists between a father and his daughter. Holding Cora hostage hurts Munro's sentimentality and his mission in this new country. It is not accidental that Munro is the commander of forces. Cooper recalls here some of the traditional rules of war: that women do not fight but are defended, that women are the heart of their country. If Magua forces Cora into a warped marriage, he essentially rapes the entire English army. Therefore, the daughter of Munro becomes a symbol of military pride. She must be rescued, or the entire operation is in disgrace; a white enterprise confounded by red vengeance.

Cora handles the situation admirably. She is still concerned for the welfare of Alice. To their credit, both Heyward and Alice will not hear of her sacrificing herself in such a manner. As they prepare to die "as they have lived, together," Magua is rallying his tribe to create more unrest. Nature imagery is again used to excite the warriors. This is their land, and they will fight against Hawkeye, their most dangerous enemy. Magua's language is flowery and descriptive. He has the gift of good orator skills, and can easily convince others to follow him.

## Chapter 12:

## Summary:

The tribe are stunned, and they begin to shout "La Longue Carabine!" as the foresters approach. The savages look to Magua for instructions. The Huron chief unsheathes his knife and aims it at Chingachgook. Hand to hand combat begins. Heyward grabs a knife and joins the fray. Cora's ropes are accidentally cut. She manages to find Alice and tear her binding ropes asunder. A savage forces Cora to her knees and cuts off some of her hair. While he laughs exultantly, Uncas descends upon him. The tomahawk of Heyward and the rifle of Hawkeye kill him quickly. Chingachgook and Magua still fight. The other men stand around them, watching. For a moment it looks as if Magua is dead, so they are triumphant. But as Hawkeye lowers his gun, Magua rolls off the precipice and is seen leaping through bushes. The scout urges them to let him go for now. He makes the round of the dead while Uncas and Heyward attend to the sisters. David is released, and he apologizes for not being helpful during the fight as he expresses heartfelt gratitude. Hawkeye, softened towards him, tells him that his words are unnecessary. David says he has the true spirit of Christianity. The scout scoffs and says he has little use for that doctrine. The musician demands a song to express thanks for their deliverance.

After the song is finished, Hawkeye says it is time to move. After some time, the group stops to build a fire and prepare dinner. The scout shares that they were hiding nearby most of the time, watching the movements of the Huron. They heard the capture and made their way along the trail. Had it not been for Uncas, they might not have found them: the young Mohican had the sense to recognize the gait of the sisters' horses in the footprints. Hawkeye then assumed they would have to be somewhat near the body of water by which the group now sat. Dinner is finished, so they eat and drink from the water until Hawkeye decides it is time to resume travel.

## Analysis:

The fight that occurs is truly Indian: each man fights a single opponent, and everything is done by hand. Even though Hawkeye carries his rifle, it is interesting to note that he does not fire it. At this moment, when everyone is evenly matched up, that would be an insult to the ceremony of battle. Hand to hand is the most honest way to fight, and Hawkeye clearly respects this. The matching of opponents itself involves some hierarchy‹notice that Chingachgook fights with Magua, leader against leader. Again this appears to be a propriety that is observed without question. Everyone is around them, but no one interferes until he appears dead. Only then does Hawkeye come forward to give one more blow.

Magua's "faking" of death is clever, but violates the honesty of the hand to hand combat. Unlike the Mohicans, who are willing to accept death proudly, the Huron chief will not submit. It is difficult to decide whether or not this is cunning or cowardice. It is an illustration of how white Magua has become. Heyward is the one who fears death, while the foresters welcome it when it comes for sure. This fray between leaders is the only battle we see up close. Cooper's description of the fight is extremely intense: sentences are long and choppy to create a chaotic tone, images such as "twined serpents" and "fabled organs of the basilisk" describe respectively body form and eyes. They have ceased to be human, and fight as animals do, without the safety of rules. While Magua's tactic is maddening to the reader, we must grudgingly admit that it is fair in these circumstances.

The nature and role of Uncas are briefly addressed in this chapter. Cooper takes the trouble to tell us that he springs to the aid of the sisters while his father and friend go around making sure that all are dead. He is certainly a gentleman in the European sense of the word. Again the author shows the unreliability of stereotypes‹few would expect Uncas to behave in this way. It is also satisfying for the reader to hear from Hawkeye's mouth that the young Mohican was responsible for their coming to the rescue: he recognized the horse prints in the ground. The reader is meant to admire Uncas. He is a brave warrior who has to contend with having two fathers. The scout especially tends to boss him around. Yet we can see that Uncas is beginning to come of age and take on a greater role in the fighting. It is likely that he will become even more involved as the novel continues.

Hawkeye and David's conversation about Christianity reveals the scout's complete disbelief in religion. Of course David finds this terribly upsetting, but does not try to convince Hawkeye otherwise. It is ironic that David should look upon the scout as a Christian when Hawkeye repeatedly refers to himself as a man without a cross. It is evident that he was brought up with such teachings, but abandoned them for some unknown reason. The scout's scorn for organized religion seems to mingle with a bitterness, whose origin is also not known. Obviously Hawkeye did not belong in whatever colonial community he lived in. It is not certain how long he has been with the Mohicans, but revealing that his age is forty years old, he has probably been with them for about half of his life.

## Chapter 13:

## Summary:

The sun is falling low as the group continues to walk. By the time twilight arrives, they have made good progress on the trail. The hue of the forest changes from green to purple. The scout leads the party into a dense thicket. Signs of struggle are evident to the foresters. A decaying building stands in the middle. The foresters enter without hesitation, and the travelers eventually follow. Chingachgook recalls a battle fought in that spot. Many Mohicans are buried there. Hawkeye assures the travelers that not many know of the existence of the building. Chingachgook and himself fought with many of the dead. Uncas and his father are all that remain of the Mohicans. Heyward expresses fatigue and wonderment at the never-ceasing energy of the foresters. The men make pillows for the "tender heads" of the travelers. The sisters pray for further mercy before laying themselves on the grassy couch. Duncan prepares to be the night watch, but Hawkeye stops him, saying that Chingachgook will be the best sentinel. Uncas and the scout lay themselves down. Heyward follows their example but remains watchful for a while. When the moon is high Chingachgook wakes the group and says it is the best time to continue the journey. As they are rousing themselves, the Mohicans hear an enemy. Hawkeye is sure that it is a man. Quietly the group begins to ready itself. About twenty voices are heard, approaching the thicket. A Huron comes through the brush and sees the building. He utters a sound of surprise. Other Huron join him, but they do not come in the house. They respect the dead, so they leave the thicket. When the voices have completely faded into the forest, Chingachgook motions that it is time to leave.

## Analysis:

The existence of the old house as a memorial to the dead is the centerpiece of this short chapter. It is a testimonial to how much the Indian cultures revere and fear their departed. The scenery is depicted as "gloomy," with a "roof of bark" that has caved in, and "huge logs of pine" still preserving their original positions. Despite its disrepair, no one has touched or bothered the house. The entrance of the group is urged by the foresters, who are not afraid but interested in this building. They are markedly different from the Huron, who approach the house but refuse to enter out of superstition. They do not respect the Delaware tribes, but they respect the right of their dead to rest peacefully.

We receive a bit more information about Hawkeye's past‹as a young man he fought with Chingachgook against the Mohawks. Apparently they have been together ever since. The author demonstrates that Hawkeye is no less than an adopted son. He fought with the Delaware because they were "a wronged people." The fact that he fought with no expectation of reward is exceedingly touching, and confirms that he is very unlike the rest of his white race, who looks to interact with Indians solely for profit.

It is mentioned again that Uncas is the last of his tribe. From the information we have read, it is evident that the Delaware are a respectable tribe, and that Uncas comes from the uppermost echelon of that tribe, which is the Mohicans. Cooper is conferring upon Uncas the duty of what might be termed as a last stand. We have seen in the previous chapter that the young warrior is becoming more involved in fighting and battling. The author is setting up the expectation for Uncas to be a great warrior, like his ancestors, and to be a credit to his people.

## Chapter 14:

## Summary:

No one speaks as they leave the building. The scout is in the lead, marching with deliberate steps. He briefly pauses to consult with the Mohicans. The entire forest sleeps except for the flowing rivulet. Hawkeye removes his shoes and wades into the water to leave no trail. David and Heyward are to follow suit. Hawkeye pauses before what he calls "the bloody pond." He recalls a day in which the Englishmen that he guided made three battles with the French. The dead were tossed into the body of water presently in front of the group. Duncan asks if the scout has seen much service in the hills; Hawkeye proudly says it is so. A man approaches who speaks the French tongue. Heyward and Cora speak in his language and manage to convince him that they are members of the French army. When the soldier leaves they continue walking. A groaning is heard in the distance, and Chingachgook has disappeared. When he returns he carries a scalp and a bloody tomahawk. Hawkeye looks shaken and says the deed would have been monstrous for a white. Heyward shushes him, lest the sister realize the cause of the delay.

The scout decides they must get out of the line of sight from Montcalm's spies. The group enters a low basin, goes toward the mountains. After climbing a bit, they arrive at a mossy rock. Hawkeye sends the horses to seek food and bids them to be safe‹they have no further need of them. Mountains close in around them, but the buildings of Fort William Henry are visible. Tents of French/Iroquois encampment are also visible. Alice wants to be turned into Montcalm: she believes he will restore children to their father. Hawkeye says he will push through and down any Mingoes in their path. Cora says they are equal to the challenge. The scout admires her courage. The fog is no longer very thick, so their journey is precarious. They hear a cannon fire, and a man approaches speaking French. Hawkeye urges them to continue pushing on. Heyward speaks in French, but he is not believed this time and they are fired upon. The scout fires back, but this only excites the soldiers. The group is still heading towards the fort. They hear the voice of Munro urging fire upon the enemies. Alice cries out that he should spare his daughter. The gates open and he rushes out, enclosing them in a hug.

## Analysis:

Approximately half of the author's tale is ended. It is important to realize that there has been little discussion of the official war up until this point; it is being fought alongside a more personal kind of war. We might see Cooper's technique as slice-of-life writing, because he focuses so distinctly on a small group in the midst of a larger conflict. All warfare has been limited to conflicts between Huron and Mohicans. This chapter contains the conclusion of the first "battle" in the book‹seeing the travelers safely to William Henry. The danger that they encounter along the way is testimony to the safety that they are about to reach. Cooper frequently juxtaposes impending good fortune with bad fortune along the way, and vice versa. The number of times that the group is almost harmed becomes somewhat ridiculous. All of the imagery of their surroundings in the forest is dark and forboding. As soon as they set out from the deserted building, they come upon what Hawkeye refers to as "the bloody pond." The phrase doubles by describing a famous battle spot and expressing disgust with the pond through the English use of words. The phrase makes certain the scout's dual persona of white man and Indian. Hawkeye's descriptions of his past fights are clean and full of flowery language‹death is described as "seeing the sun for the last time." In the end, it all comes back to nature; the ability to perceive his surroundings is how a warrior knows that he is alive. But this description of death is oddly at variance with the scenes we have so far witnessed. Hawkeye's triumphant attitude does not completely capture the suffering that has been shown to us. We wonder if he ha become hardened to extinguishing life.

Immediately it seems, the question is answered. As soon as Chingachgook scalps the young Frenchman who approaches the party, asking questions, Hawkeye is visibly shaken. We do not usually see him express weakness so openly. Then, the first words out of his mouth slightly condemn the action of the old Mohican: "Twould have been cruel and inhuman for a white skin." Now the reader is truly surprised. Never before has the scout said anything against his friends. Hawkeye wishes that the tomahawk had fallen upon a Huron instead of "a gay young boy from the old countries." It is fine for an Indian to die the Indian way, but Hawkeye is repulsed when a white man is attacked in that manner. Furthermore, he himself would not do such a horrendous deed. The incredible solidarity that Hawkeye has with his Mohican friends is slightly cracked at this moment. The division between them, white and red, is much more noticeable. The scout oscillates between his two cultures, often pitting one against the other. The reader is slightly angry that he would resume to judge those whom are his constant companions, but we realize that it cannot be helped. A leopard may change his spots, but he remains a leopard all the same.

We are gratified to see that Duncan is finally of some real use as he and Cora are able to initially fool the French into believing that they are fellow country people, thereby buying the group more time to escape. Entering the official battlegrounds, the reader is leaving the domain of the foresters and entering the domain of Duncan and Munro.

## Chapter 15:

## Summary:

A few days pass. Munro is fighting a power against whom he does not possess adequate means of resistance. It appears that Webb has forgotten about them. The soldiers are still spirited, however. Heyward is pacing by the bastions on the lake. It is a lovely evening, and the mountains are green and fresh. From his vantage point he sees Hawkeye being escorted to the fort by a French officer. The scout is bound and unarmed. The sisters are also wandering, and they meet Duncan by the bastions. They thank him for his bravery in bringing them to William Henry. Heyward goes in to see Munro. He apologizes that the recommended messenger is in the hands of the enemy. Munro states that Montcalm has returned Hawkeye but kept a letter of importance. Heyward remarks that the camp will not be tenable for much longer. Munro informs his major that he has been invited for an interview with Montcalm. He wishes Heyward to go in his place. He accepts. Once with the French leader, he sees Magua, who smiles at him bitterly. While talking to Montcalm, Heyward is told that there are 20,000 Frenchmen as opposed to 8000 Englishmen at the most. Heyward strains to hear knowledge from the intercepted letter, but the French general offers none. Duncan leaves, escorted by French soldiers, and returns to Munro.

## Analysis:

This short chapter invites the reader to start making comparisons between European warfare and Indian warfare. We have seen that Indian warfare involves a constant vigilance and sneakiness: one never knows when an ambush might be coming. European warfare, however, runs on a strange kind of schedule. From his vantage point in the English fort, Duncan can see Frenchman setting up nets in the lake to block cannon balls. As they do this, they are playing in the water and being frivolous. Heyward watches, but he does not rally his troops to shoot them. There seems to be an unspoken understanding that soldiers cannot be ambushed while performing such a duty. The same is true for the French officer who escorts Hawkeye back to the English fort. It would be easy enough to shoot the man, but that is neither honorable nor permissible. In a case of Indian warfare, the messenger would most likely have been shot to prevent him from revealing any secrets to his tribe. Most likely, a messenger would not have been sent.

The ceremony of European warfare is very evident. The fact that Hawkeye is released but the letter retained is both civilized and frustrating. While Indians would rather disclose information and have the battle as soon as possible, face to face, there is an odd dancing about that goes on with the Europeans. Clearly they prefer to stop wars instead of propagating them‹herein lies the major difference between the two peoples. The fact that Duncan goes to have a conversation with Montcalm in Munro's place, and that Montcalm does not reveal the contents of the letter, illustrates that this interaction resembles a poker game in which everyone has to be very careful not to show too much of their hand. Strange that under the pretense of meetings that supposedly demonstrate "civilized, honest fighting," there should be so much effort to deceive. The Indians at the very least are much more straightforward‹what you see is what you get.

The brief appearance of the sisters, during which Alice teases Duncan and Cora thanks him and expresses worry for the military situation, shows once again the immense differences between them. Alice needs to be sheltered, while Cora can stand alone.

# Analysis of Chapters 16-20

## Chapter 16:

## Summary:

Munro is attended only by his daughters. Alice sits on his lap and plays with his hair, while Cora looks on with amusement. Once Alice realizes Duncan's presence, she exclaims with joy. The father hurries the sisters out of the room. Heyward tries to inform Munro of Montcalm's message, but is interrupted. Munro says the Frenchman shall not be master of William Henry if Webb comes through with reinforcements. He proclaims that Duncan will receive knighthood. Heyward says that he hoped the honor would extend to being Munro's son. Munro asks if Heyward has been this intelligible with Cora. Duncan says not at all‹he is in love with Alice. Munro expresses fondness for Heyward, and says he would not have it turn to hatred. He then speaks of his past. The sisters have different mothers. Cora's mother came from the West Indies. Munro believes that Duncan looks down upon Cora for this reason. Once Heyward makes it clear that this is not the case, Munro softens and extols Alice's grace and beauty. After this detour the men turn back to the message of Montcalm. Munro is angry that Montcalm has answered his questions with a riddle. He decides to meet the Frenchman himself.

The armies advance to a neutral spot amidst drums and fife. Duncan warns that everyone should be on the lookout for treachery of any kind. Once the leaders meet, the armies fall back a bit. Duncan translates until Montcalm makes it known that he speaks English. He hands over the letter, which is from Webb. It urges a speedy surrender owing to his inability to send any help. Munro is stunned, and determines that they should dig their graves behind the fort. Montcalm intervenes and asks that they listen to his terms: they leave the fort, carrying their colors, their arms, with a grand march around the place. Munro accepts the terms and asks Heyward to make arrangements. A treaty is signed, and the English, from a military standpoint, will retain their honor.

## Analysis:

Cooper divides this chapter into two basic parts. In the first, he spends a great deal of time depicting the character of Munro and discussing the origin of his children. This is the only time in the entire novel that Munro has an extended conversation with anyone, and the reader is supposed to gather impressions of who he is. The sweet scene with his daughters makes it clear that he is a very loving father. His blustering remarks about Montcalm, whom he says "can go to the devil," indicate an overwhelming amount of confidence in the success of his operation, especially considering that Webb has failed to send reinforcements. He is a brave soldier, but not necessarily the most sharp-witted. After all, Duncan's attempts to have a serious conversation with him about the new meeting that has been suggested by Montcalm are derailed by Munro's blustering and seemingly spacey mind. The author writes him as a neutral kind of character: there is no reason to hate him, but he is frustrating at times. Munro's main flaw seems to be that he makes assumptions where they are unfounded, such as that Webb is definitely sending reinforcements and that Duncan is in love with Cora.

The comical yet touching moment in which Heyward reveals that Alice is the daughter he loves also says much about the character of Munro, for it is here that he states that the girls have different mothers; indeed, that Cora's mother was from the West Indies. Foolishly he believes that Duncan may be prejudiced against her that reason, but his anger obscures the actual importance of the information. Having a mixed child like Cora signifies that Munro does not care much for the categorizations in people that so define the country he is defending. This is a credit to him. Cora's dark countenance is explained, and her heritage marks her as an even greater symbol, that of the melting pot that so characterizes this new country over which the Europeans are fighting. In truth Cora is closer to the mixed heritage of the Indians than to the pureblood of her native country people. Perhaps this accounts for the manner in which the Mohicans and the Huron seem to fixate on her. While it is not known whether or not her mixed race is common knowledge, it is certain that those who do know do not ostracize or look down upon her. The fact that they do not extend the same courtesy to the Indians reveals a major theme: the hypocrisy of the colonizers.

The second part of the chapter addresses once more the ceremony of European warfare. The meeting between Montcalm and Munro is very formal, each being escorted by a portion of the army. The actual surrender is also very premeditated on the part of Montcalm. When the secret letter is read aloud, Munro knows that his defeat is certain. His pride in his country is plain as he first decides that they should dig their graves in the fort. He is not willing to relinquish any part of military honor. Yet Montcalm's proposal is surprising. The colors and weapons, such emblems of patriotism, are left with the English army; they are allowed to march out intact, preserving all glory. The entire ceremony reiterates the fact that Europeans are not concerned with fighting to the death in warfare; they prefer to make compromises. Thus, their concept of honor differs hugely from that of the Indians. To men such as the Mohicans and the Huron, honor is measured by the number of scalps killed, not saved.

Briefly, we can see that the character of Montcalm is generally a positive one. He is not mentioned very often, but his proposal is exceedingly fair to the English. Clearly he is unwilling to use his advantage for profit. The author overall spends more time delineating the Indian warriors as opposed to the European soldiers.

## Chapter 17:

## Summary:

The conquered are sullen and dejected, while the victorious are jubilant. In the early hours of the morning, a man in a cape is leaving the French encampment. It seems to be an officer. He is not stopped or interrupted at all. By the light of an obscure moon he waits. Soon a figure approaches him from the side. Another figure is in the bushes with a rifle. The officer is Montcalm, and the man who has approached him is Magua. Montcalm asks for the meaning behind the rifles‹the hatchet is buried between England and France. Magua says not a single warrior has a scalp, and the "pale-faces" become friends. He demands to know why Montcalm brought his men into the woods, and "fired at the earthen house." He grabs Montcalm's hand and makes him feel the scars upon his body. Magua says he knows how to speak to a Huron warrior.

The first tap of drums signals the beginning of the surrender. The English army has all the signs of a hurried and forced departure. Women and children run about, holding the "scanty" remains of their baggage. Heyward approaches Munro, who asks that he look after his daughters. He finds the sisters and sees that David is with them‹he finds much that is "comely and melodious" in the sisters. Heyward instructs David to let no one insult the sisters. Cora says they must go; the fort is no longer fit for children of an officer. They go with the parade. In the crowd, Cora spots Magua and his comrades. It seems that they will let the crowd pass. But a colorful shawl attracts a Huron, and advances upon her. In terror the woman wraps her child in the garment. He grabs the child and dashes its head upon a rock. He then drives a tomahawk into the mother's head. Magua raises the war cry, and 2000 Hurons attack. Alice calls for their father. David begins to sing. The savages who are about to attack stand listening. Magua approaches and shouts with pleasure upon seeing his old prisoners. He asks Cora once again to be his wife. She refuses. In retaliation he grabs Alice and throws her upon a horse. He motions that Cora should mount the other one. She complies, and he puts Alice on the same horse as he leads them out of the fray. David sees this, and jumps on a horse to follow them. Finally, the shrieks of the wounded are drowned out by the triumphant yells of the savages.

## Analysis:

The fury of Magua in this chapter makes it clear to the reader that the travelers will never be completely safe until he and his comrades are dead. He speaks in nature images, saying that he is "the sun of his tribe" and that "there were mountains between his people and himself, but now the skies are clear." He is greatly incensed that the whites have become friends, while no Huron have scalps. The nature talk illustrates Magua's grand scheme‹the clear sky is a symbol of his freedom to do as he pleases. Montcalm seems to think nothing of his anger, which is a huge blunder on his part. Obviously he does not know the character of the man he is dealing with.

Although we have an understanding of the root of Magua's anger, we are unable to forgive him and his tribe for the unprovoked attack upon a mother and her baby. Cooper describes this scene graphically, writing that the infant's head is "dashed upon a rock" while the mother, "a statue of despair," is killed when a Huron "mercifully drove his tomahawk through her head." The author's mastery of order of events has the effect of letting the reader picture the scene clearly without too many adjectives. The picture of the mother crumbling to the ground as she clutches her dead child is horribly pathetic and maddening. Like the travelers, they are innocent victims of European ambitions. That they have no one to help defend them at this moment makes them even more pitiful. The author uses the attack of the Huron upon the retreating families to turn the tides of the battle between the foresters and the Huron. The nature of battle has a different purpose, not just for glory, but for the future of European settlement in the new country and for the future of Indian tradition. Magua and the Huron are setting a dangerous precedent with their violent behavior. The burden rests on the foresters to stop them.

Magua's evil nature is again confirmed as he kidnaps Alice in order to make Cora follow him. Truly he cancels out his better behavior from earlier. He is now the complete enemy to all the Europeans; even his French fathers cannot control him. That he takes such shameless advantage of Cora's love for her sister is terribly despicable. Out of affection, with bravery, Cora follows. The more selfless she appears, the more the reader admires her. There is no thought of her own safety; she easily could have let Alice go. But we expect more from her. Remarkably, David, who appears little in the preceding chapters, takes it upon himself to follow her. This is certainly a slight transformation: the singer is exhibiting a courage that no one, including himself, would suspect. Still, he is not totally changed, as he proves when he comically manages to save himself from savage violation by singing a beautiful hymn and impressing the Huron.

## Chapter 18:

## Summary:

"The Massacre of William Henry" is complete. The woods are possessed with stillness and death. The warmth of the sun is hid, and the whole landscape is referred to as "a pictured allegory of life." The forms of five men can be seen in the distance. Two are Indians, three are white. It is the foresters, with Heyward and Munro. They walk along the battlefield, observing the victims. The scout speaks of revenge as an Indian feeling, and says he has never seen the hand of the devil so plainly. He denounces the French commander. Uncas finds the green veil of Cora. Munro asks for his child. Uncas says he will try. The scout says she must have been captured, and they must look on the trail for signs of their departure. Moccasin tracks are found. Uncas examines them, and says they are from Magua. David's horn is also found. Heyward is happy that David has not deserted them. Hawkeyesays he can sing, but cannot kill food or fight. They cautiously start the trail. Horse prints are observed. A trinket of Alice's is found. Duncan wishes to leave immediately, but the scout says an Indian never undertakes an arduous journey without smoking over a council-fire. They will rest tonight in the ruined fort, and start fresh tomorrow.

## Analysis:

This chapter calls into question the idea of historical accuracy. The fact that there is an actual William Henry massacre in colonial history indicates that Cooper is playing with time and is writing fiction about real events. It is important to keep in mind while reading that this is a piece of literature, not an historical document. Thus, all characters and events are subject to more bias than usual. We are primarily concerned with characters and authorial attitude towards what happens to them‹but we should remember that while they are based on real people, the author is not writing for history.

The terrible picture of the landscape is accompanied by a "frightful" change in the season: the sun is "hidden behind an impenetrable mass of vapor," "green angry waters lash the shores," the plain is "scathed by the consuming lightening." The imagery brings forth the antiquated theme of nature as an indicator of the rightness of the world. Shakespeare commonly used scenes such as this one to indicate that foul play was at work, that evil forces were alive and working against the protagonist. The scene has a similar meaning here. It is testament to the unjust attack which has taken place against the retreating army. Presumably such conditions will persist until everything is set right.

When the author says in so many words that the scene is atrocious, he convinces us when Hawkeye, the man without religion, remarks that he has never seen so much of the Devil's handiwork. While the scout blusters about in vengeful anger, the Mohicans are resentful but calm. It is essential that the rituals of attack be observed‹only these rituals are not white ones. Trying to find the trail, Uncas comes across Cora's veil. As Munro begs him to find his child, it is clear to the reader that the foresters are in charge of this mission. The soldiers have intelligently relinquished control to them. The reader is relieved to see that they are at last learning their limits. The idea of the meeting around the council-fire illustrates this point more forcefully. It is not a European rescue mission, but a Mohican one.

## Chapter 19:

## Summary:

The foresters prepare to pass the night in the fort. They light a fire, and make a meal of bear's meat. Heyward observes. He thinks that he hears a noise. He alerts the scout. Hawkeye does not believe it is a Huron. They are too superstitious to linger about the dead. He believes it is a wolf. After the noise continues, however, Hawkeye becomes suspicious and vigilant. He calls Uncas, who throws himself flat on the ground to listen. Heyward believes they should alert the others of possible intruders, but Hawkeye will not. Still, he is concerned about Uncas. By hissing he calls Chingachgook, who goes to join his son. A shot rings out, a fruitless attempt on the old Mohican's life. Another shot issues from the rifle of Uncas. Chingachgook returns, and says that there would be one attacker. Uncas returns to the circle, and says it was an Oneida he killed. The scout is agitated, says they will be flanked on all sides if the Oneidas are involved. Hawkeye says the attacker knew who he was trying to shoot, and he wishes he could have shot him. Heyward says this would violate the treaty, but Hawkeye does not care. He thinks little of the Huron and the Oneida, who speak the same language but take each other's scalps. Chingachgook lights a pipe, and the foresters smoke it as they discuss the situation. Hawkeye speaks the most. Eventually, he is tired and sleeps. The Mohicans continue talking. Father speaks to son affectionately, and their manner is completely changed. The language is musical. Soon they both sleep. Duncan, looking at the example of the foresters, finally closes his eyes.

## Analysis:

The near-attack by the Oneida is a means of enlarging the scope of the battle. This conflict is no longer limited to the foresters and Magua‹other tribes are becoming involved. As this warrior tries to shoot at the men, Uncas is the one who goes after him. This is further evidence of his emerging role as a warrior, which is ever so important. We might view this as a rise in the power of Uncas. He is not trying to assume complete control of the group, but he is demonstrating more of his skills. Hawkeye, on this rare occasion, misjudges the sound that Duncan hears. Freely he says that "being a white-skin" he will not deny his nature, and asks the young Mohican to use his senses to discern the source of the disturbance. The more fallible he is shown to be, the more necessary it is that Uncas take a bigger piece of the action; his father, though strong, is still older and not as quick. It is certain that Cooper is preparing the reader for another large-scale conflict. The battle for the sisters must be fought, and although it is not yet clear how, Uncas will have to play a large part in the fight, as he is the last representative of his people.

The scout's brief words on the nature of the Oneida indicates once more how different the Mohicans are from their enemies. Hawkeye notes that the Oneida and the Huron share "tongues," but will kill one another anyway. There appears to be little loyalty between them. If the Oneida are aiding in the fight, we can assume it is for profit. The scout knows they will have to result to sneaky tactics if they are to be successful. Heyward speaks about violating the treaty, but Hawkeye waves him away impatiently. Evidently Duncan still has not grasped the concept of the guerilla warfare that defines Indian conflicts. He wants to play by European rules, which will not result in victory. Magua and the Huron did not respect the treaty; the foresters have no choice but to ignore it as well. Hawkeye appears well-poised to blaze the trail towards the enemies. After his speech around the fire, the Mohicans become converts to his way of thinking. The author inserts a small commentary, saying that had father and son been representatives of a great and civilized people, their reputation for consistency would have been tarnished by the scout's influence. The authorial voice appears amused at how easily the two men are swayed, but it is not disapproving at all. The opinions of Heyward and Munro are not considered at all.

When the white men all sleep, there is an unprecedented moment of tenderness between the two Mohicans. We are told that Chingachgook speaks in "soft, playful tones of affection." The features of both men are relaxed and loving. Their language is described as "musical," conferring upon it a new level of beauty. The private nature of their interaction almost makes the reader feel that we are eavesdropping. Their conversation makes certain the idea that their austere countenances can be dropped, and that they can be as affectionate towards one another as anyone else is to their parents and children. That Uncas makes sure the coals warm his father's feet is a sign of sweet concern. We are meant to see the Mohicans as extremely human, very unlike the savage Huron.

## Chapter 20:

## Summary:

The stars are still out when Hawkeye arouses the sleepers. They gather themselves and follow him to a ditch. The scout instructs them to step on stones and wood pieces. The extreme caution is mysterious to the English soldiers, but they comply nonetheless. Hawkeye proclaims that it is a trail only a nose can follow. They are by a river. They edge the canoe into the water and paddle away. Heyward wonders at this hurried departure. The scout says that the Oneidas will return with reinforcements. Duncan believes that Munro's presence would be a deterrent, but Hawkeye disagrees. Heyward worries about Indian ambushes along the river. Uncas and Hawkeye maneuver the canoe through a twisty channel. Uncas gives a low cry‹he has spotted fire smoke mingling with the mist on the river. Hawkeye says they must turn back or make a quick row. With all men paddling, they manage to glide by quietly and are soon out of the range of bullets. Still, the war cry is heard and a shot rings out. Hawkeye raises his rifle and takes aim. Uncas cries out again: there is another canoe directly across from them. The scout resumes paddling so that the canoes are making parallel trajectories. Hawkeye raises his gun once more, urging his companions to keep rowing despite their fatigue. Duncan sees they are preparing to shoot. The scout urges the Englishmen to duck in the canoe. Heyward refuses. Shots come at the canoe, but they are poorly aimed. Hawkeye laughs and raises his piece in triumph. Heyward takes Hawkeye's paddle; the scout begins to shoot. One Huron is struck, and their canoe stops. The Mohicans take the opportunity to catch their breath. Chingachgook's shoulder has been grazed by a bullet. Hawkeye resumes rowing after Munro pleads that they find his children. For now they have lost the other canoe. They disembark and take the canoe into the wood. It is carefully concealed. The Mohicans gather their possessions, and the scout announces that they are at last ready to proceed with the quest for the sisters.

## Analysis:

The highlight of this chapter is the dangerous battle that takes place on the water. The author creates anticipation at the very beginning when Hawkeye says to "think over their prayers," but not to say them aloud. The fact that our so-called "man without a cross" encourages prayer indicates that something terrible but exciting is about to happen. The reader can see Cooper's novel as a predecessor to modern-day tales of adventure and quest. The story moves along with many close shaves, escapes that almost don't happen, but we know that they must. The group must still save the sisters from the treacherous dealings of the Huron before the novel can come to any satisfactory conclusion.

Despite the fact that we know how the fight will turn out as soon as it begins, Cooper does an excellent job of describing the actual encounter. Our senses becomes involved as we read about "the crack of a rifle," "the accursed whoop," the mist that rises suspiciously "like a streak of thin cloud." We are as disoriented as the combatants. Sentence structure becomes very long, but extremely choppy since practically every noun is modified by an adjective phrase. Consider the following example: "The well known crack of a rifle, whose ball came skipping along the placid surface of the strait, and a shrill yell from the island, interrupted his speech, and announced that their passage was discovered." Although the overall message here is simple, the author provides embellishment that almost makes us lose our place. The tone is confused and panicked. Yet this makes for a captivating fight scene, and we read with tremendous concentration. This long structure also has the effect of drawing out an event which could have only taken a few moments.

The refusal of Munro and Duncan to take cover in the canoe is both brave and maddening. While their pride is understandable, they are only creating more of a target for the enemies. As they are of little use in the skirmish, they should duck down. But Heyward will not hear of this, saying that it would be a bad example for "the highest in rank to dodge." Both English soldiers are still caught upon the idea of white man's rank. They do not seem to recognize that their statuses have completely changed. They are being cared for by the foresters. That the scout and the Mohicans preserve their idea of rank is a kindness on their part. Hawkeye for a moment is far too involved in the battle‹he is losing sight of what they are after, and must be reminded by Munro, the chief "officer," that they are seeking his children. Because he has learned "obedience to superiors," Hawkeye complies. Truly, though, he did not have to listen to Munro, who has no real power over him in the forest.

# Analysis of Chapters 21-25

## Chapter 21:

## Summary:

The group has landed in the region between Champlain and the Hudson. They are making a laborious hike into the wilderness, guided only by a star. Eventually they stop and camp. The foresters sleep, so Duncan and Munro do the same. Once light reappears, they continue the journey. Hawkeye often stops to confer with Chingachgook. Uncas stands, a silent but interested listener. The seniors must run the expedition. The old Mohican is not sure they have taken the right path. Uncas makes an examination when he is questioned, and ascertains that they are on the right path. They are convinced that Magua has gone through valleys. There are false trails, but they are not deceived. Uncas is in front, but he is always consulting with his father and the scout. At one point they stop to redraw the trail. Leaves are overturned, sticks removed. Uncas utters a cry of "exultation" as he finds the heavy print of David concealed beneath grass and sticks. The scout believes that David was forced to walk first, and everyone has trod in his footsteps. The group walks on, pausing to make sure they are going the right way. The foresters feel that the women are being carried, but they do not know how. After finding some small moccasin prints, they conclude that the sisters were carried for part of the way. The men stop for a meal. Afterwards Hawkeye pushes forward with renewed vigor. He begins to scent the Huron. The three foresters split in three directions. Munro and Heyward remain with the scout. Through the thicket, the men see the encampment; it is a village full of earthen dwellings. A tall stranger comes away from the villages and nears the thicket that conceals the scout and his friends. Hawkeye looks at him and says he is not a Huron. They cannot see that the man has any arms. Hawkeye decides to surprise him. Duncan stands ready to shoot if necessary. The scout nears the stranger, stops, and starts to laugh. It is David, the song master.

## Analysis:

The thoroughness of the Mohicans and the scout is laudable. They proceed very carefully to make sure that their trail is correct. With every step Hawkeye becomes "more deliberate and watchful." He consults Chingachgook frequently, which credits him as knowing the limits of his white senses. Although he would also like to ask Uncas, the countenance of the young man shows that he is wholly depending on his father. Even though Uncas spots a trail rather quickly, he refrains from speaking until Chingachgook has had his say. The actions of both younger men indicate the tremendous respect for the old Mohican. It is important to notice that Chingachgook does not speak frequently in the novel; but when he does speak, he speaks profoundly, without wasting words. He is asked for advice when the outcome of the task is crucial, a means of life and death. That he is playing such a large role in blazing the trail indicates how critical this quest is. We wonder at the whereabouts of the sisters, and hope that they are not harmed.

When Duncan sees that Uncas was withholding information, he is annoyed at him. Then Hawkeye steps in and speaks about the differences in white and Indian knowledge. To the Europeans, books contain all that they need know. To the Indians, however, experience is the only teacher. Heyward, who surely must know little about finding a trail, has no real right to speak against anything that the Mohicans do. But as always, he seems to believe that he can improve upon their ways. The soldier is merely demonstrating his misunderstanding of the Indian culture. His attitude, though understandable under the stressful circumstances, is a partial indicator of the larger intolerance that Europeans manifest towards the native citizens of this new country.

Uncas's role is very important in this expedition. Hawkeye compliments him numerous times, saying that he will be "an honor to his people." Once we cross into enemy territory, we know that his time to fully prove himself is steadily approaching.

David's appearance at the end of the section is comical and almost unbelievable. We wonder how he could have met themŠ

## Chapter 22:

## Summary:

Heyward is, expectantly, surprised at the recent turn of events. He runs forward to join David and Hawkeye. They envelope the musician in a hugging-dance. David informs them that the two sisters are captives; that Magua is away, hunting with his younger men. Cora is with a neighboring people, while Alice is among the women of the Huron. Duncan rejoices at this news. David says he is free to move about as he likes because the Indians were impressed by his song on the field of battle. They seem to believe he is a bit loony. The scout laughs at this. David quickly relates the events since their capture: Magua waited on the mountain until a safe moment was presented, and then began a route towards the Canadas. The captives were well-cared for. The Mohicans rejoin the group. Hawkeye asks about the pictures in the war-paint of the neighboring tribe. David describes the animal as a cross between a serpent and a tortoise. The Mohicans exclaim, and the scout shakes his head in a disgruntled manner. Chingachgook reveals a similar animal on his chest. He says his tribe is high chief to these peoples, which may prove to be good or bad amongst the people who hold Cora. Hawkeye decides that David should go back to the village as if nothing is wrong. Heyward resolves to go with him, in the guise of a juggler with Indian paint who has been wandering among neighboring tribes. The scout objects at first, but lets it be when he sees that Duncan will not change his mind. Munro and Chingachgook are to go to the neighboring people to rescue Cora; Duncan and David will work to free Alice. The other two will remain in the forest. Emergency calls are discussed. They all part.

Alone with David, Heyward feels apprehensive. The fading light increases the gloom of the wilderness. They approach the village from a slight elevation. David speaks of the "devil children" as they approach the "tents of the Philistines."

## Analysis:

For all that has happened, David remains the most unchanged character in whole story. In a place where he does not belong, he nonetheless winds up out of harm's way. The fact that this is all accidental, related solely to his singing, is what provides the comic relief at this critical moment. The author's choice to mingle comedy and drama is not altogether strange. The comic character of David balances out the more serious characters like the foresters. His existence is what allows the reader to see the novel as a fantastic fairy-adventure tale as opposed to a more historical tale. All are glad to see him. More than anything he is a child who needs their help, part of the package that they want to rescue. Their allegiance to him is fortunate, for most of the time, David seems a little too flaky to really survive the harsh circumstances. Interestingly enough, his manner of little resistance has Indian origins. Perhaps he survives because he does not provoke attack by trying to escape. Indeed, we must wonder if he even cares to escape‹he is not so vehement about it as are the sisters and Duncan.

Nevertheless, David's appearance ensures an entry into the village. It is ironic that having so little skill for cunning tasks, he will now have to play a huge role in Alice's rescue. Heyward accompanying him improves matters a bit, but not too much. The overall plan of pretending to be a lost juggler seems extremely farfetched, and it is unlikely that two men unused to deceiving Indian eyes will be able to succeed. The fact that Heyward is willing to wear paint illustrates how desperate he is to infiltrate this village. The lines drawn upon him become symbols of acceptance of Indian culture. Duncan's only hope is that Magua is conveniently not present. This plot twist is also somewhat unbelievable‹would this fierce warrior leave his village when he knows that the foresters will try to rescue the women? But we can humor the author's whims.

The knowledge of Chingachgook's symbol on the chests of the neighboring tribe is a clever foreshadowing device. Clearly they are partial relatives. Such ties have great importance in the Indian cultures. At the same time, if they hold Cora, they are friendly to the Huron. We wait with anticipation to see what side these people will choose.

## Chapter 23:

## Summary:

A group of children are the first to notice Duncan and David. They raise a warning yell. A dozen warriors are stirred into action. They stand in front of a central lodge and await the arrival of the strangers. Duncan strives to look unconcerned; David walks in with a practiced manner. Following the musician's example, Heyward pulls up some brush and sits down on the floor. He asks if anyone speaks French or English. A few heads turn to him, but do not answer. Finally one asks if Duncan uses the tongue of the Huron when speaking to his Father. Heyward makes an evasive answer. He is asked how he will respond when he see the scalps gathered from the "Yengeese." Heyward inwardly winces and says that he will commend the duty. He also states that he has come as a messenger to see if any of the Indian children are sick. He wears paint because his brothers give it to him; when the Huron come among the whites, do they not lay aside the buffalo skins? Low applause greets this and reveals a favorable impression.

Two yells are heard from the forest: one low, the other high and very long. The warriors glide from the lodge. Shouts fill the air. There appear to be two fugitives trying to escape the tribe. Preparations are in progress for a battle of some sort. Duncan also goes outside and observes the events. He seems to be safe until the council decides on his fate. Tied to a post in the middle of a circle is Uncas. Much savage laughter fills the air. His countenance is completely unruffled. Heyward recoils in terror. A warrior appears and guides Uncas into the lodge. The gait of the young Mohican is calm and prideful the entire time. The gray-haired chief who spoke to Duncan earlier addresses Uncas. He says that the Mohican is from "a nation of women" but that he has proven himself a man. He urges him to rest tonight because the last words will be spoken in the morning. The chief adds that two men were sent for his companion. Uncas sneers and points out that two gunshots were heard‹therefore the two men will not return. The chief retorts by asking how such a warrior could be caught. Uncas says he was pursuing a coward. He points to a solitary Huron. The crowd buzzes with anger towards the lowly warrior. The chief says his name will never again be mentioned in the tribe. The warrior is anguished but struggles to remain placid. He takes a long knife and passes it into his chest. He falls at the feet of Uncas.

## Analysis:

Heyward's performance in the main lodge is admirable. One of the most convincing aspect of the show is the manner in which Duncan's language is modified. He uses favorable epithets such as "wise and brave nation" and "red warriors." His words are spoken very slowly, to create a sense of comfort on his part with this meeting. Taking on the character of a healer is a long shot, but one that succeeds in convincing the Huron that their Canada father has their best interests at heart because he cares about their health. However, the biggest compliment to the tribe by far is the paint. It means a lot to them that a white man among them is trying his hardest to fit in with their culture. Duncan cleverly alludes to the Indian chief who "lays aside his buffalo robe, to carry the shirt that is offered him." He is merely repaying them in kind. That this goes over so well with the council illustrates the general insensitivity of the Europeans. We can presume that few white men try to adopt tribal customs. Instead, they want the Indians to conform to their standards, while they do nothing. It is somewhat unfair that Duncan is able to take advantage of this to gain access to the village, but we applaud him anyway.

We are offered a brief glimpse of an Indian routine for examining prisoners when Uncas is captured. A number of cries are raised, and a line of warriors flee into the woods. A procession occurs with scalps hanging from a pole. Everyone, including women and children, grab weapons. The emphasis is on complete unity, defense and death. Even though there is only one man to fight, it is important to make a show of total hatred for that person. Notice the taunts that are used against Uncas. An old woman emerges, telling him that he comes from "a race of women" and that Huron girls "will make him petticoats and find him a husband." Challenging the manhood of a warrior is the utmost insult. That a woman speaks these words indicates how little women are valued in these cultures. The strength and bravery of a man is the complete measure of his self-worth. For this reason, the man who fled from Uncas must kill himself. No one in the tribe wants to know him any longer, because he has disgraced the people. It is interesting that the Huron are willing to take Uncas's word as totally honest; it is strange that the coward does not try to deny his cowardice. Certainly, this bravery is so deeply entrenched in their cultures that no one would dare to lie about it. By our standards, this suicide seems rather harsh, but to these people, fear is not a permissible emotion. If there is anything inhuman about the Indians, it is this fact.

Faced with taunts and death, Uncas remains passive and quiet. His indifference is incredible, a tribute to the greatness of his people. To sit and acknowledge the insults of those who are beneath him would be to lower himself. He is not afraid, but prideful. Even if he is fearless, Duncan and the reader are frightened enough for his safety.

## Chapter 24:

## Summary:

Uncas manages to speak reassuringly to Heyward before they are separated by the rustling of the crowd. Since no one is watching him, he looks around the village for some sign of Alice. Having no success, he returns to the main lodge to have a word with David. The musician has not returned there. The chief who addressed Duncan earlier speaks again, saying that an evil spirit has inhabited the wife of a warrior: can the "cunning stranger" get rid of it? Heyward has no choice but to say he will try. A figure looms in the doorway to the lodge, and Duncan realizes with horror that it is Magua. He reports good moose killing, and says that the youth who just died should meet them on the trail. Silence greets this statement, and the boy's father speaks, saying he has no son by that name. He rises and leaves. Magua then receives news of Uncas's capture. The Huron warrior looks upon the form of the young Mohican and realizes who he is: "Le Cerf Agile!" Magua pronounces his death. A warrior is about to strike him, but Magua stops him and says it must happen in sunlight. He wants to let Uncas try to sleep this night.

As Magua fails to spot Duncan, he is led away from the lodge by a guide who is taking him to the sick woman. A squaw tends a fire outside, whose light reveals the form of a large bear ambling about. Once or twice it puts its paws on Heyward, who is fast losing his nerve. He is dropped into the cavern that holds the patient. There is a circle of women caring for her, and David is at the center of them. The woman is paralyzed and discolored. David sings to her, which the tribe sees as infirmity. A growl is heard‹the bear has wandered into the cavern. David hurriedly leaves.

## Analysis:

The fact that Magua completely misses the presence of Heyward is probably the most far-fetched aspect of the entire plot. Most likely we are supposed to attribute this to his enthusiasm due to the capture of Uncas. His joy is described as "ferocious." His nostrils dilate like those of "a tiger at bay." Magua seems incapable of experiencing any emotions that are not tinged with violence. His evil character is again confirmed. Even though he is the prisoner, Uncas smiles with contentment as he enjoys his "victory" among the Huron, who are all extremely agitated by his presence. Their tumult is a compliment to his superb skills as a warrior. Why else would they be so happy to have captured him? The pairing of the two adversaries, leaders among their people, is appropriate. Clearly the time for Uncas to prove himself has arrived. We do not yet know under what circumstances this will occur, but it is steadily approaching.

Magua briefly exercises his skills as an orator. He rallies his people by referring to the disgraceful manner in which many Huron have died at the hands of the foresters. Bringing up the dead, and making Uncas the symbol of all their enemies, is smart. Magua blends "the natural sympathies with the religious superstition of his auditors" so that all instincts of humanity and mercy are banished‹all they want now is revenge. The Huron chief is a skilled politician, in the European sense of the word. He knows how to make his agenda a common one, so that his thirst for blood can be satisfied with the help of others. Making Uncas try to sleep the night is another instance of cruelty, but one that is necessary, of course, for plot twists.

The moment of comedy comes when Duncan is led to the sick woman's cave, and expected to cure her. He is frightened, but then, upon arriving he finds David surrounded by women, who all trying to heal the girl. It is funny that David has fit in so marvelously with the tribe. He is of much more use here than he was with the travelers. The comedy continues when the bear follows Duncan into the cave and appears to hum one of David's melodies. This scares David so much that he makes a run for the exit, saying that the woman expects her doctor.

## Chapter 25:

## Summary:

The guide shoos away the women, and approaches the bedside of the invalid. He asks Heyward to show his power, and departs. The bear begins to paw strangely at its head. It comes off as a mask and the face of the grinning scout is visible. He relates that the old Mohican and Munro have taken refuge in an old beaver lodge to keep them safe from the Huron. He asks whether Duncan has seen Uncas. Heyward speaks of his death sentence. Hawkeye says it is the true reason he has come‹he cannot abandon such a boy to the Huron. After the capture of Uncas, Hawkeye shot the pursuers and had the fortune to fall upon the real conjurer who had come to look after the sick woman. He knocked him out and took the bear costume. Hawkeye climbs the walls to look around, and reports that Alice is on the other side of this cavern. Duncan washes off the paint with some water and climbs over the wall. Alice is overjoyed to see him. Heyward updates her on what has occurred, and says that they must get away from the village and find her father. Alice asks of Cora. Duncan assures her that she is not forgotten; but that his concern for Alice herself is deeper, and that he hopes to have a more significant tie to her in the future. Alice trembles and says she wants the presence of her father before she says anything else.

A guttural voice is heard‹Magua has entered the cavern. Duncan challenges him to do his worst; Magua says he will gather his tribe and see how bravely those words could be repeated. He boards up one entrance, and prepares to leave by another when the growl of the bear is heard. Thinking it is the conjurer, he waves it aside impatiently. The bear grasps him in a hug, pinning his arms to his sides. Heyward binds Magua completely. The scout reveals himself and gags the new captive. They must get away quickly. Heyward takes Alice in his arms and covers her up. Outside the door of the cavern the relatives of the sick woman wait. Duncan tells them that the spirit has been trapped in the cave and that they are taking the woman away to be strengthened. He says that no one must enter the cave. They disappear into the woods. Alice revives. Hawkeye instructs them to follow the brook to the nearby tribe who will probably give them protection. He will stay to fight for Uncas.

## Analysis:

This chapter details the beginning of the grand rescue mission that will last until the story's conclusion. We are overjoyed to see that Hawkeye has returned to the action. We have confidence that our "superhero" will not fail. His loyalty to Uncas is proven as he states that "it would never do to abandon such a boy to the Huron." The scout sees how special Uncas is, knows that he is the last of his people. The reader must remember how easy it would have been for Hawkeye to refuse the rescue mission. While he is ostensibly here to help Duncan and Alice as well, Uncas is the one for whom he will risk his life. True to his sarcastic nature, the scout says that the day Uncas must die for want of a friend, "Killdeer" will become as harmless as David's tuning horn. These sentiments demonstrate not only Hawkeye's affection for the young Mohican, but esteem for his father and the tribe. We have seen in a previous chapter how important the father-son relationship is in the Indian cultures. Everything that a child does reflects doubly upon his parent. For Uncas to die with Huron jeering at him is an insult to all Mohicans. Hawkeye will do anything to prevent that, even if he winds up dying with him.

The manner in which Magua and the Huron are subdued is nothing less than comical. The author seems to be intimating that their powers of perception are lacking. Although Magua has repeatedly said in many ways that deceiving his people is impossible, Hawkeye and Duncan manage to change their identities rather easily, and no one takes much notice. The two convince the relatives of the sick woman that the spirit is trapped in the cave, and that they must take the covered daughter into the woods. They are both clever and lucky‹the capture of Magua is only possible because of his momentary carelessness; he calls the scout a fool and tells him to go play, but indeed he is the fool. The reader is meant to feel satisfaction that the Huron chief is at last on the shorter end of the stick.

The loving scene between Alice and Heyward, in which he confesses his love for her, is more comical than touching: could there be a more inappropriate place for a marriage proposal? In any case, we must be indulgent of Duncan, who has suffered enough danger at this point in time to believe that he might not live to see his wedding day. Alice's desire to wait until her father is present is a sweet wish, but betrays how dependent she is on others to make decisions for her. Still, we are impressed at how she tells of Duncan when he says that he values Alice more than Cora. Her behavior when Magua enters the tent is quite composed, much like her older sister would behave. The fact that she faints, though, shows that her former delicacy has not receded.

# Analysis of Chapters 26-30

## Chapter 26:

## Summary:

Hawkeye carefully makes his way back to the village. Looking into a lodge, he sees that it is the dwelling of David. He is alarmed by the appearance of a bear, but Hawkeye quickly makes him understand who the bear truly is. David asks for news of the others. Hawkeye says they are free, but for Uncas. He tells David to lead him to the young Mohican. The musician speaks to the guards of Uncas, asks whether or not they wish to see him cry and beg for mercy. He says that the conjurer has come to take the captive's courage, but that all the warriors must stand far away, lest their courage be taken as well. They enter the space, and see Uncas bound in a corner. Immediately he recognizes the animal conjurer as counterfeit. He turns away in disgust, but the hissing of the snake is made. Uncas utters the name "Hawkeye!" with surprise. David cuts the bands. From the costume Hawkeye hands a knife to Uncas. He says the Huron are outside; they must be ready. Uncas want to run to the neighboring tribe. Hawkeye knows he can never run fast enough‹he tells Uncas to go while he replaces the costume. Uncas wants to stay and fight with Hawkeye. The scout decides that the Mohican should put on the skin while he exchanges clothing with David. The musician declares he will sit in the place of Uncas, who has fought bravely on his behalf. Hawkeye says if he practiced a religion, he would wish to do it as well as David. Leaving the tent, the scout sings psalms and keeps time with his hand. The deceivers are clear of the village when a long cry is raised. Hawkeye tosses a hidden rifle to Uncas as he brandishes his own weapon. They run into the forest.

## Analysis:

The plot is starting to move much quicker. We are heading towards something, but we are not sure what it is. There is much more dialogue in this chapter than there has been in the chapters more immediately preceding it. This changes the tone of the story greatly‹it is less reflective, more action-oriented. The plans being constantly arranged between characters create a feeling of suspense for the reader. This is the author's method of keep interest high, and it is appropriate that he change writing style slightly towards the end. It makes us eager for the conclusion.

David's role in rescuing the scout and the Mohican is the highlight of this chapter. His performance when speaking to the guards of Uncas is superb. Not a trace of fear is evident. The musician shows unprecedented cunning as he talks about the Delawares as women, and refers to Uncas by his hated name, Le Cerf Agile. He is more convincing and smooth than Duncan was. But nothing can prepare the reader for the moment he agrees to sit in the place of Uncas, that the other two men might escape. Freely he offers his life to the men who have fought bravely for him. David calmly states that he has never forgotten his faith in the Lord, "even in the greatest straits." Hawkeye, the man without a cross, gives him the highest compliment he can when he says that if he were religious, he would hope to practice as David does. Clearly the singer gathers a tremendous amount of courage and strength from Christianity. As the most openly religious character in the book, we can take David as a general symbol of religion. Cooper uses this character to explore the usefulness of Christian doctrine. Interestingly enough, he seems divided, not knowing whether to praise Christianity or condemn it. Until now, David has been little more than a clown, resulting in a very undignified, silly portrayal of the religion he so loves. Then, he becomes brave, even heroic. For the first time, David's Christianity has noble and practical use; it is certainly a worthy pursuit in the scout's eyes. It appears that Cooper is unwilling to completely insult the doctrine. Like anything, it has its good and bad points.

That the author writes about how Uncas immediately knows that Hawkeye is a fake bear for lack of proper bear skills shows that there is a division between the two; much as he tries, Hawkeye can never be a complete Mohican. But the fact that Uncas will not leave Hawkeye, who cannot run as fast as he, demonstrates that he reciprocates the scout's great love for him. He refers to Hawkeye as the brother of his father. To align someone with Chingachgook is the greatest show of respect possible for the young Mohican. When the two squeeze hands, it is a rare physical sign of affection. The comedy of the previous chapter continues as they escape from right under the noses of the guards. The Huronlook more and more foolish.

As always, the writing is filled with much appeal to the senses. The author writes of the "darkness" and "coldness" that surrounds the two as they run towards the forest. Hawkeye speaks of the "devils following their scent" into the forest. Uncas calls the neighboring tribe "Tortoises." The diction creates an imagery that makes the reader feel like we are experiencing the flight first-hand.

## Chapter 27:

## Summary:

Upon being discovered, David starts to sing loudly. The Huron let him be, but rouse the entire village. They wonder at the whereabouts of Magua. The real conjurer is found and tells his story. A group of warriors is selected to prosecute the investigation. Warriors are sent to the trail. The chief says that the young woman has died‹the Great Spirit is angry with his children. To everyone's surprise Magua appears, still partially bound. He is freed and his story told. At this moment the Huron's anger is so great, he could kill anyone. When all deceit is made completely clear, the tribe is in an uproar. Magua still thinks of personal interests. Without Alice, he does not have as much leeway over Cora, but he still has her as his prisoner. Using his superb oratory skills, he calms the crowd and is placed in control of the recovery effort. He returns to his lodge, but does not sleep; instead he sits in the corner and plots evil. Long before dawn, warriors arrive in his hut. They have weapons but are painted for peace. Magua intends to go to their allies and find the Delawares. A large beaver is present, which is taken as a good omen. The group departs. The beaver watches interestedly, and when the party has advanced into the wood, takes off a mask to reveal the features of Chingachgook.

## Analysis:

It is important to note the manner in which the Huron react to the huge disappointment of losing practically all of their prisoners. There is no chaotic attempt to grab weapons and run after the escaped prisoners. Rather, the author writes: "Instead of rushing in a confused and disorderly throng to the cavern, ten of the wisest and firmest among the chiefs were selected to prosecute the investigation." This is a very reasonable way to handle the circumstances. This is a reminder to the reader that Indian cultures do not teach their warriors to be hot-headed and impulsive. A cool head makes for an even more wicked revenge. The lack of hostility is somewhat frightening; it is evident that the Huron are channeling all of their energies into punishing the foresters. Even Magua, who is indeed furious at their escape, does not handle the situation with anger: "MaguaŠnow changed his manner, and assumed the air of one who knoew how to think and act with a dignity worthy of so grave a subject." With incredible finesse, the Huron chief soothes his people, "flattering their self-love," and for that they put him in charge of the recovery effort. We have seen Magua the smooth politician before. The key to leadership in the Indian tribe is the confidence of those around you. Because the chief is a well-skilled orator, he can bend his peers to his will. The reader, knowing Magua as we do, however, must remember that his personal interests are always foremost. How much he cares about the pride of his people is not certain. More than anything he wants vengeance for personal wrongs on the foresters, and control over Cora as his wife. He dupes his own tribe more than he tricks anyone else in the novel because he is not honest about his agenda. This reveals in another way his seemingly inherent evil nature.

The appearance of Chingachgook in the guise of a beaver is surprising but not unexpected. The manner in which the foresters take on the look of animals recalls the theme of minimalism in these cultures. Deceits are carried out in simple ways, by taking advantage of the natural setting that surrounds the village. Obviously animals and animal costumes are a common sight the Huron; that is why Hawkeye and Chingachgook are so successful in their disguises. The less fancy the plans, the greater the likelihood of a positive outcome.

## Chapter 28:

## Summary:

The half-tribe of Delawares is not too far from the Huron settlement. Magua reaches them and shows a gesture of amity. He is greeted as he makes many courteous signs of greeting. The wisest orator speaks to Magua and says he welcome to come into the main lodge and share the morning meal. The two warriors are accompanied by several old men. They enter the lodge and speak of the hunt that Magua made recently for the moose. The war activities of the Huron are discussed. Magua asks if Cora is any trouble; the Delaware chief says no. The Huron asks if strange feet have been seen in the woods. The Delaware provides an evasive answer. Magua is puzzled at his inability to penetrate this caution, but nonetheless presents the chief with gifts, trinkets plundered from females at William Henry. Everyone is most favorably impressed. Magua's welcome is restated with more enthusiasm. He asks again about strangers in the camp. The Delaware says that strangers are always welcome. Magua speaks of spies in his own camp who have fled to the Delaware as friends; thus the Delaware have turned from their "Canada father." The Delaware is calm as he says that they have not chosen to go on the warpath. Magua states that "La Longue Carabine" is in the camp at that moment. The news is spread throughout the settlement. The patriarch Tamenund enters the main lodge. The people in question have been found. A circle forms outside with Tamenund in the middle.

## Analysis:

The ceremonial interaction that takes place between Magua and the neighboring Delaware tribe is very structured. Once again, the hierarchy of the tribe is preserved. While warriors gesture amicably to Magua, no one speaks to him except "their most approved orator." It is he who can invite the Huron chief to share the morning meal. Even though the rest of the tribe is dying to know the cause of such an unusual visit, they do not betray "the least impatience by sign or word." To express curiosity would be disrespectful, for that kind of interference would seem to question the ability of tribal leaders to do their job. The sharing of food is a symbolic action that is equated with friendship; the two are accompanied by several older men who seem to be both guests and advisors.

Magua is in rare form as he puts on his show for the Delaware leaders. For a man who has repeatedly said that the Delaware are women, he manages to pay them regal compliments by presenting them with trinkets stolen from corpses at William Henry. The origin of the objects is disgusting, and reminds us of the thievish streak that runs through the Huron. That the Delaware are so terribly impressed does not mark them to be as cunning as Magua is, though they are probably more honest. Magua is extremely crafty in his presentations, making sure that the best gifts go to the Delaware of highest rank. Those who do not receive such quality gifts are flattered with well-chosen compliments. Had president been a viable position in Indian tribes, Magua would have easily been the winner. While he frustrates the reader, we cannot help but admire at least slightly his ability to work those around him to his will. This quality, along with a somewhat cruel past, is what makes Magua an ideal villain. There are moments when we like him, moments when we hate him.

Despite their liking of Magua's gifts, it is commendable that the Delaware are reluctant to put complete faith in his words before they have a council meeting. Even after this, when the escaped prisoners have been found, a circle must form in the middle of village that is comprised of all its inhabitants. The wise Tamenund must control proceedings from the middle. He is described in terms of the wrinkles on his face, and the richness of his robes. Both of these things symbolize wisdom and respect. He is in the center because tradition mandates that the wisest are the most worthy make judgments. For this he is "revered," "loved" by his village. Routine and ceremony are always observed, especially in matters of life and death; the Indian cultures value this perhaps above all other concerns.

## Chapter 29:

## Summary:

The prisoners walk into the circle. Cora and Alice's arms are entwined. Heyward accompanies them. Hawkeye is in the rear. Tamenund asks who is La Longue Carabine. Duncan tries to take on that persona at first. Hawkeye steps forward, says his kin name is Nathaniel, and Hawkeye is a compliment of the Delaware. Tamenund asks Magua who is the snake who crept into the camp. Magua points at the scout. Duncan says he is a liar. The men are given guns and made to shoot so as to decide who is the infamous rifleman. The task is to break a gourd. Hawkeye is established as the man. Magua makes a speech to the assembly about the greatness of the Delaware people. Tamenund listens and pronounces that Magua can leave with all of those who are his. The Huron looks greedily at Cora. She throws herself at the feet of the old Delaware, begging for mercy. Tamenund's vacant expression becomes admiring. She asks him if he is a father; she wants nothing for herself, only for Alice to be returned to Munro. Tamenund states that the pale-faces are proud and hungry. Cora says there is one of the Delaware who has not yet been heard, who must speak. The old Delaware says to bring him into the circle.

## Analysis:

The most touching displays in this chapter are the courageous stands made by both Duncan and Cora. Heyward has no real need to throw himself into further peril‹Alice is not the one being threatened. Yet he comes to the aid of Hawkeye as if he were a brother. His efforts to "cloak his invaluable friend" are futile but worthwhile. This is the manner in which Duncan is repaying his gratitude. The reader is happy to see this, for it allows everyone present to recognize the greatness of the deeds that Hawkeye and his friends have performed for the travelers. Moving further out from the individual persons, we can see this action as a symbolic unity between European and Indian, even though both men are technically white. For when Duncan tries to save Hawkeye, he is also trying to help the Mohicans. This pair has managed to transcend the prejudices that others cannot. The image of Cora prostrate on the ground, begging for the life of her sister, is not only noble; it is a display of subservience, white begging Indian for favors. That Cora will beg Tamenund and the Delaware for help while she scorns Magua and the Huron indicates that she is among the people who see a tremendous difference in the natures of the tribes. We are supposed to take this as a sign of Delaware superiority, and we do.

Magua's extensive oratory skills are more explicitly revealed. He speaks exclusively of the Great Spirit who made men and colored them differently. The tone is of one telling a legend, so lush is the imagery and simile, nature and otherwise. Constantly he is comparing the Indians to various animals. Because these cultures value nature so highly, there can be no better compliment. He then makes reference to the greatness of the Delaware ancestors, the Lenni Lenape, and compliments Tamenund by saying he has been there to see everything. Magua is there to seek justice. The reader can almost take this speech to heart, it is so convincing. But more than convincing, it is infuriating, because we know that most of it is insincere. Magua is saying the right things so that his prisoners will be returned to him. That we know this, and the Delaware do not, is an instance of dramatic irony.

The author also illustrates the extent of Hawkeye's performance skills. It is obvious how much enmity exists between the Huron chief and the scout. Yet Hawkeye, even with a gun in his hand, tells Magua that he will not shoot him because the color of his skin forbids it. It is an insult for a white man to shoot an Indian. Again, the reader sees through this ruse, knows that it is a speech to impress the Delaware. Hawkeye has already tried to shoot Magua, and he would do so again. We do not condemn his insincerity, however, because of the terrible wrongs Magua has incited on the travelers.

## Chapter 30:

## Summary:

The multitude stands aside, and Uncas walks into the throng. He is deliberate and waits respectfully at the foot of the patriarch until he is noticed. Tamenund asks what tongue he speaks. Uncas states it is the language of the Delaware. The old chief speaks angrily of the young Mohican for entering the camp by stealth; he believes that Uncas is a false Delaware. Uncas incites much anger as he tells the assembly that they are dogs who whine when the Frenchmen offer the "offals of deer." Tamenund is angry and says that the people may do what they want with the Mohican. While the rest of his friends look anxious, Uncas stays perfectly calm. Warriors rush at him, and one tears off his hunting shirt. Suddenly they stop, looking in wonderment at the tortoise tattooed in blue ink on his chest‹a symbol of his heritage. Tamenund asks urgently who he is. Upon finding that Chingachgook is his father, he rejoices that Uncas has been found and brought back to his people. He and his father are members of the "unchanged race."

Uncas crosses to Hawkeye and cuts his bonds. He introduces him as a friend, who must be welcome among the Delaware if Uncas himself is welcome. Tamenund says the scout has killed many of the tribe. Hawkeye speaks up to say that this is a lie; he has never knowingly harmed a Delaware, only the Huron. Uncas says that all should be allowed to leave. On the question of Cora, however, he is silent. Magua shouts that she belongs to him, that Uncas knows this. The young Mohican quietly says that it is so. Cora is ordered to depart with Magua. Heyward springs forward and begs the Huron to be merciful. Magua refuses any promises of riches. Cora is his revenge. Hawkeye steps forward and offers to put away his gun for the season if Cora is released. He offers to train Magua's men. Magua will hear none of it. Hawkeye tells Uncas of the love he has for his father and himself. He says that he must die at some point, and leaves the Mohican his gun. He offers himself to Magua as a prisoner. The Huron almost accepts, but says that he has but one mind. Cora turns to the scout and praises him for his generosity. She makes a tearful goodbye to Heyward and Alice, and turns to leave. Duncan yells that he will find Magua. The Huron smirks and challenges Uncas and the Delaware to pursue him. He leaves freely, protected by the laws of Indian hospitality.

## Analysis:

The greatness of Uncas is finally revealed as he comes into the center of the circle. He is not forced forward, but walks confidently and calmly. Even before his identity is known, the throng is "bent in secret admiration on the erect, agile, faultless person." He moves like one who has been trained extensively, yet the moves are so natural. The impressiveness of this figure comes because of what he does not do. He never shouts to be heard or resists when they place their hands on him. To do so would be to sink to their level of confusion, which Uncas will never do. There is a royalty about his carriage as the image of the noble savage is recalled.

Cooper briefly addresses two themes: those of language and death. When the Delaware hear that Uncas speaks in their tongue, they are outraged that one of their own would presume to sneak into their village. Language is a clear symbol of unity, and Uncas cannot be an honest man if he needs to hide in the village. Even more, their language is repeatedly described as "musical." To taint something so traditionally beautiful is a terrible insult. When Uncas adds insult to injury and calls the Delaware whining dogs, he is sentenced to death. The author writes "a cry of vengeance burst at onceŠthe circle broke its order, and screams of delight mingled with the bustle and tumult of preparation." The joy that the tribe takes in the impending death of Uncas recalls the fury of the Huron when they also were going to kill him. Clearly, no matter how peace-loving, an Indian tribe will rejoice in the painful deaths of those who cross them. Death is a spectacle for the village, a means of teaching by cruel example what behavior is unacceptable.

White men can beg, but the Indian gets results. As soon as the Delaware learn that Uncas is a Mohican, they rejoice and treat him as if he is a great leader who has been with them for ages. The importance of filial piety, a major theme in the undertones of the novel, is certain as Uncas calls himself "son of Chingachgook." Even the great Tamenund, who has been mostly impassive during the time we have seen him, expresses openly his overwhelming emotions. Uncas is able to cut the binds of Hawkeye and free Alice and Duncan with only a few words. His position in the tribe gives him impenetrable authority. This is the most decisive example of tribal hierarchy that we have seen.

Uncas becomes even more noble when he admits to Tamenund that, by all Indian customs, Cora belongs to Magua. We know that he cares for her, but he cannot lie. The reader can only imagine his inner struggle. He refuses to dishonor himself and his people with dishonesty, however, and for this we must admire him. Hawkeye also becomes a noble savage as he offers his life to Magua for Cora's freedom. We understand that the Delaware will not assault one who is visiting their village, but we get the sense that they would like to renounce that law for a few moments. The words of Uncas act as a cry for war. His time to prove himself has arrived.

# Analysis of Chapters 31-33

## Chapter 31:

## Summary:

Once the pair are out of sight, the tribe expresses great agitation. Women and children are dismissed, and the men retire to the lodges, only to reemerge later in preparation for an attack. They pray to the Manitou for good fortune. Uncas is the leader of the expedition. He gives the battle-cry, and the men spring into action. A post that simulates the enemy is ripped to shreds. Uncas watches the sun‹it is nearing the point when the truce with Maguais to end. Paint is on; Alice is seen to a place of safety while Heyward and Hawkeye thirst for the upcoming fight. The scout dispatches a young boy to retrieve the rifles of Uncas and himself. The quest is successful. Hawkeye praises the young boy and says he will be a great chief. Uncas divides the warriors among the tribal chiefs. Hawkeye is one of the commanders. Heyward is also given the opportunity to be a commander, but he chooses to be a volunteer at the side of the scout. Although the young Mohican would normally go and rush into the enemy ranks, he restrains himself because he knows that is what his people would do. A stranger is seen in the distance. He appears to be a Huron. Hawkeye is about to fire, when he realizes that it is David. The hapless musician is brought to the chiefs. He relates that the Huron are out in terrific numbers just outside the village. Cora is kept in a cave. Uncas and Hawkeye decide to split their forces to approach the village from two sides. Duncan is pleased with the plan. It will be attempted.

## Analysis:

It is somewhat amusing to see that the first thing anyone does in this chapter is to remove Tamenund and Alice from the throng. War is simply not an activity for white women or for wise men. The anger of the tribe is clear as they begin to rip the bark from a pine tree. Until now we have not seen any Indians ever destroy a piece of nature unnecessarily. In this case, however, it seems justified. The tribe is likened to a hive of bees, and they are ready to fight their adversaries. Once again we see that war is a communal effort. The women come forth from their lodges, singing songs of joy and lamentation. The children dance. Hawkeye dispatches one to get the rifles in the forest. Overall this is a happy undertaking. The nation of the Delaware is going to war for the insults they have suffered, but also to defend their honorable principles. It might just be wishful thinking, but the reader cannot readily picture this tribe trying to force an unwilling woman to live with a warrior. The manner in which the successful retriever of guns is admired and envied shows just how widespread this war fever is among those of all ages. Apparently you must learn to love warfare when you are young.

Uncas is in his element as the overall commander of forces. Although he is tempted to rush into battle, he restrains himself, knowing that "such a course would have been in opposition to all the received practices and opinions of his countrymen." Already Uncas is thinking like a true leader, with a little bit of politics thrown in. He again demonstrates his esteem for Hawkeye as he makes him an equal commander of forces. The Indians are more than happy to obey the scout. Heyward proves to be a surprise. Rather than command his own men, he wants to fight under Hawkeye. The reader knows that Duncan has finally learned the limitation of a white man fighting Indian warfare. If nothing else, his time in the forest has taught him something useful.

The reappearance of David is almost too much to believe, but we laugh in relief that he seems able to escape death more times than a cat. Perhaps Cooper finds his great faith deserving of such incredible luck. David, as always, provides comic relief when he speaks about the Huron skulking around "with evil intent" and in great numbers. Not only does he understate the situation; he tells them nothing that they do not know. The rapid, short sentences demonstrate that the war is about to begin. The suspense is built, and we are ready.

## Chapter 32:

## Summary:

The woods appear very still. But Hawkeye is not deceived by the "treacherous quiet." His group comes upon a path. The scout asks if anyone knows where it runs. One of his warriors does know. Hawkeye decides they will follow the path until they "scent" the Huron. He realizes that David has followed his group. Gravely he tells the musician that there will be fierce fighting. Although not a warring man, David states that he would gladly strike a blow on behalf of Cora. The path is followed, but after a while its cover ends. Hawkeye is troubled at having met no enemy. They are no sooner uncovered, however, when rifles begin to fire. A Delaware falls dead. The Huron begin to retreat, and Hawkeye's men follow. The battle is in full force. The sounds coming from Uncas's quarter seem to indicate that his group is extremely successful, and getting closer all the time to the Huron village. Hawkeye knows that the men against him must be disposed of if he is to be of any help to Uncas. Combat is brutal for a few seconds. Some more Delaware are killed, but more Huron fall.

A whoop is heard from the side‹Chingachgook has joined the battle. Flanked on both sides without cover, the remaining Huron begin to spread out and run. Many more are killed. Munro and the old Mohican join the scout and Heyward. They turn to join Uncas, still fighting the main body of the Huron. Chingachgook breaks off to reach his son directly, while Hawkeye stays to shoot at the Huron from another angle. He sees the bands of the two Mohicans down a dozen Huron. Finally Uncas spies Magua. He rushes upon him, ready to fight. Magua stands to receive him with secret joy, until the rifle of the scout is heard. He then turns and runs away. The fight has moved into the village. Many warriors fall, but Magua is still alive. Uncas chases him to the cave. Magua grabs Cora and holds her so as to shield himself. Because of her, the Huron lose ground in the footrace. Uncas and his friends steadily catch up. Finally Cora stops, announcing that Magua may kill her if he likes, but she will go no further. Magua offers Cora his wigwam or his knife. She drops to her knees and speaks to heaven that He may do what He likes with her. Magua raises his knife to kill her, but hesitates. Uncas springs forward. As Magua struggles with him, a Huron passes his knife into Cora's breast. Magua turns upon his countryman, and drives his tomahawk into the back of Uncas. The young Mohican rises and strikes Cora's murderer to the ground with one stroke. But his power is lost after that stand. Magua stabs him three times and utters a cry of joy. By this time Hawkeye arrives at the scene and screams. Magua leaps over some rocks but misses his mark. He hangs on the precipice until Hawkeye shoots him.

## Analysis:

"Action-packed" is an understatement for this chapter! It is full of dialogue and shortly clipped sentences, which both serve to keep the action moving very quickly. Everyone is rising to the occasion. Even the musician, David, is eager to fight for justice in Cora's name. After numerous chapters of preparations for various battles and conflicts, we have the climactic conclusion to the war that has raged in this novel between the Huron and the foresters. The deaths of two of the most loved characters, Cora and Uncas, result from the violence. Strangely enough, their murders, which happen one after the other, are the most touching incidents in the entire novel. Unable to sustain the idea of living with a man she abhors, Cora summons all of her strength and refuses to move. The manner in which she kneels on the ground conveys a sense of helplessness and power. She may be unable to physically do anything about this situation, but she has the weapon of faith on her side. Cora is willing to die if it will deliver her from a terrible future. Magua's henchman does kill her, but she has already won the battle with Magua by denying him his sweet revenge. Still, the reader mourns the loss of our heroine. Cora dies for the sins that others have committed. She was in the wrong place at the wrong time, and this makes her death doubly tragic. She remains a symbol of strength and innocence, and a victim of European ambitions.

Similarly, the death of Uncas is an awful disappointment. His murder is not as expected as Cora's. When she dies, we believe that Magua should turn upon her murderer; instead, he murders Uncas. Perhaps Magua blames the young Mohican for inadvertently causing Cora's death when he jumps upon Magua and gives the other Huron the chance to kill the young woman. Whatever the reason, we mourn because in fact, Uncas dies out of love for Cora. It is a pure, innocent, untainted love, never referred to or spoken about. Throughout the novel Uncas favors Cora over Alice; that he is willing to die for her shows just how much he cares. That he manages to kill Cora's murderer before he loses his own strength is sad but beautiful. As Magua's affection for Cora is something twisted and evil, the affection of Uncas is goodness personified. Cooper creates in this yet another pairing of the savage vs. the noble savage. This theme resounds in all Mohican-Huron interactions. The point is simple: there are very, very good Indians and very, very bad Indians. And we know which are which.

Magua is never more evil than in the moment of Uncas's death. Cooper writes that he "whirls" the bloody knife at Duncan, who is running to them, begging the Huron for mercy. He utters a cry "so fierce, so wild, and yet so joyous." His happiness is absolutely nauseating. There is nothing human about Magua at this moment. Had Cooper allowed him to escape, the book would have come to a terrible end. Happily enough, the author gratifies the wishes of his readers by having Magua bring about his own death by jumping arrogantly over a large crevice. Had he slithered away more quietly, he might have believably lived. But his need to flaunt the victory in the face of the scout and his friends ultimately allows the scout to shoot him. Both Hawkeye and the reader tremble with anticipation as Magua hangs from the precipice, desperately trying to get a knee on the mountain. It is only just that he feel what the sensation of helplessness before he dies. For all his talk about honor, Magua dies more disgracefully than anyone else. Thankfully, he gets what he deserves.

## Chapter 33:

## Summary:

The following day the Delaware is a nation of mourners. There is no rejoicing. Six girls adorn the form of Cora with flowers. Munro is seated at her feet; David stands next to him. Heyward stands a bit apart from the group. Close by is the form of Uncas. Chingachgook sits at his feet, staring at him with an impenetrable gaze. Hawkeye is at his side with Tamenund, who is positioned at the head of his people. Silence reigns over the scene. There is no crying. Uncas is extolled for his fine Indian virtues. Cora is praised for beauty and courage. They are glorified in song. Chingachgook sings by himself to his son. Cora's body is carried by the women to a cluster of pines to be buried. The scout thanks them for their preparations. The men of the village remain with Uncas. David begins a sacred song, his most beautiful ever. There is complete stillness as everyone listens. Munro gives his thanks, and Hawkeye translates. The aged father announces that it is time to leave. David and Heyward mount horses that have been brought by remaining troops. Alice is among them, sobbing. Duncan grasps Hawkeye, and repeats their engagement to meet within the posts of the British army. They are accompanied by aides of Montcalm. Hawkeye watches as they disappear into the forest.

The scout goes back to catch one last look at Uncas as he is enclosed in skins. Chingachgook has not spoken at all. But he turns and asks why everyone is so sad. His son has died with honor, has gone to the "happy hunting-ground." He says that he is alone‹but here Hawkeye interrupts and says it is not so; that he will remain with the old Mohican always. Chingachgook grasps his hand in friendship. They cry silently for a few moments. Tamenund comes forth and says that he has lived to see the last of the Mohicans. The story becomes a legend in Indian lore.

## Analysis:

"Aftermath" would be an appropriate title for this final chapter. After the storm comes the regrouping. We must say goodbye to the dead, as everyone else prepares to move on with their lives. Cooper provides us with a mourning that combines both Indian and white traditions. This is an important innovation for a satisfactory conclusion because it symbolizes a compromise between two cultures, at least temporarily as they share the tragedy. Eulogies are made about Cora and Uncas in English and Delaware. Songs are sung by both David and the Delaware girls. Munro sits at his daughter's feet; Chingachgook sits at his son's feet. Yet the author asserts that the men around Uncas are far more touching than the group around Cora. Perhaps this is related to the inability of Chingachgook to show any emotion. Munro has a "hidden anguish" that is only partially concealed by his gray locks. The old Mohican keeps an anxious but steady look on his son, so that "a stranger could not tell the living from the dead." This concept is a frightening one. Chingachgook seems entranced, almost as if he is putting himself in his son's place. Apparently, this is his way of handling sorrow, as Munro cries to handle his.

The sanctity of ceremony is entirely preserved. Specific people are appointed to each task concerning the dead. Cora and Uncas are commended by using the typical imagery of nature that is so flattering in Indian cultures. As the whites speak of God, the Delaware girls speak of a Great Spirit whose will it was to take the two people. While Europeans often look at Indian religions as pagan, this moment demonstrates a definite similarity between them. They have the same ideas, expressed in different ways.

When Chingachgook finally speaks, he surprises everyone by asking why they are sad. He believes that his son has lived a good life and that is what counts with him. In truth, his attitude is the ideal one to have. Surely he will miss his son, but he chooses to believe that he is happier in the spirit world than he was on earth. When the old Mohican says that he is alone, Hawkeye immediately discounts that thought. His intention to remain with Chingachgook is both noble and necessary. The two men, such fierce warriors, have a mutual dependence on one another. Like the nature that surrounds them, they exist in a delicate balance, white and Indian, but see no distinctions. When Hawkeye says that Uncas has left them "for a time," he seems to intimate that they will see him again in the next life. It seems that the man without a cross has one in the end.

## HISTORYCAL ELEMENTS:

In developing his metaphorical title, The Last of the Mohicans, Cooper was more concerned with Indians in general than with particular Indians. In The Last of the Mohicans, he intentionally simplified and distorted tribal histories and Indian/European alliances. Cooper’s fictive version provided literary clarity by organizing Indians into two well-defined camps: neutral or pro-Anglo-American Algonquin speakers (i.e. Delawares, Lenni-Lenape, Mohicans) and pro-French Iroquoian speakers (i.e., Huron, Iroquois, Mingos, Six Nations).1Historically, alliances between Indians and Europeans were complex, situational, shifting, and sometimes pitted closely related Indian groups against each other.2 In The Last of the Mohicans, Delaware Indians and Mingos exchanged historical places. Initially, the Delaware are neutral. Later they join Uncas, who turns out to be a Delaware chief, on his rescue mission. In the conclusion they are very sympathetic hosts at the funeral for Cora and Uncas. Historically, however, Delaware Indians sided with the French in the early years of the war, helping to defeat Braddock and capture Fort William Henry, before later switching sides.3 Delaware religious revitalization oratory was the source of Magua’s speech about the color-coded characteristics of the three races. But in Cooper’s novel Magua is a Huron, and sometimes simply another Mingo. In The Last of the Mohicans and The Pathfinder, the other Leather-Stocking novel set during The French and Indian War, “Mingos” are generic enemy Indians, allied with the French. Historically, however, Mingos could be found on either side. In the dispute over occupation of the upper Ohio Valley, an alliance between the Mingo Half King, Tanaghrisson, and a young Virginia lieutenant colonel, George Washington, was particularly fateful. On May 28, 1754, the Half King tomahawked and scalped Joseph Coulen de Jumonville, the leader of a French military delegation, while a letter he had just presented to Washington was being translated. The murder of the French envoy, Jumonville, followed by the massacre of his troops by the Half King and his warriors was the spark that ignited the French and Indian War in America (1754–1761) and the larger Seven Year’s War (1756–1763) which was fought in Europe, Africa, Asia, the West Indies, and the Philippines.

The story of The Last of the Mohicans is grounded upon the real historical events. The frontier was overrun by the European explorers. In an attempt to explore the wild land of the New England many French and English colonizers entered the scene of the frontier. Those European created a conflict in Native American tribes.

## James Fenimore Cooper

Having created a conflict among native tribes those Europeans took political advantage. Some native tribes were attracted by the English, others were guided by the French. Thus, there was political rivalry over the camp of French explorer and the English camp. Due to their political selfishness and rivalry bloody war used to take place. Both the French and the English conquerors fought each other and sometimes against the natives over frontier land. The famous massacre at the fort of William Henry narrated in chapter 17 is historical. Chapter 17 narrates how lots of soldiers and people were killed on the spot of bloodshed around the fort of William Henry on the 10th of August 1757. This tragic event of bloodshed is historically true. Hence it can be said that the novel is grounded on the solid historical reality.

Magua is a villain. Magua was discarded by his community of Hurons because he began to drink French wine. This ostracism (neglect) Magua received from his community is a kind of punishment for those who turn away from their culture and family. Magua was displaced from his culture. Many French colonizers had been playing their tricks of the trade. They tried to weaken the natives by making those tribal people drunkard. By encouraging Magua and other people like him to drink and follow French culture, the French colonizers were displacing those tribal people from their community. This problem of displacement Magua faced is historically true.

With the on rush and onset of the Europeans on the frontier, many examples of violence increased. Consequently, native tribes began to divide themselves. They were not only divided but there also grew an intense hostility between them. The last of the Mohicans narrates the hostile battle between Huron and Mohicans. This battle between Huron and Mohicans tribe is a colonially motivated tribal conflict masterminded by the European. The conflict led to the problem of tribal demise. The problem of tribal demise is a historically true fact. The novel The Last of the Mohicanscaptures this historical reality by slowly building the background theme of tribal demise.

At that time when civilization rushed to the frontier violence began to erupt increasingly. In the representation of this violence Cooper expressed the breadth of his knowledge regarding the native tribe's art of fighting. The name of the weapon by which Hawkeye fights against obstacles is named tomahawk. In real life also tribal American fought with that weapon. Hence there is the expression of historical reality concerning Cooper's representation of tribal warfare.

Finally, in the novel, there is a mention of native Indian American culture. Delaware community is represented. In the representation of Delaware community where Uncas was held captive, we find explicit examples of realities regarding tribal culture and family. To sum up, there are elements of historical realism in the representation of political, cultural and historical climate of the frontier. Hence the novel The Last of the Mohicans is historical in its narrative treatment and account.

Placed in its historical contexts, the tragic conclusion of The Last of the Mohicans speaks to the author’s well-founded pessimism about racial amalgamation and the position of American Indians and African Americans in American society in the foreseeable future. Had he been able to look beyond the foreseeable future, into the twenty-first century, he might have been wonderfully surprised to see that one of the most respected Americans was a mixture of white, black, American Indian, and Asian; and another was an equal mixture of white and black. He might have been less surprised to learn that most Americans thought of Tiger Woods and Barack Obama as great African Americans.

## Death of Cora and Magua

"I will go no further!" cried Cora, stopping unexpectedly on a ledge of rock, that overhung a deep precipice, at no great distance from the summit of the mountain. "Kill me if thou wilt, detestable Huron; I will go no further."

The supporters of the maiden raised their ready tomahawks with the impious joy that friends are thought to take in mischief, but Magua stayed the uplifted arms. The Huron chief, after casting the weapons he had wrested from his companions over the rock, drew his knife, and turned to his captive, with a look in which conflicting passions fiercely contended

"Woman," he said, "chose; the wigwam or the knife of Le Subtil!"

Cora regarded him not, but dropping on her knees, she raised her eyes and stretched her arms toward heaven, saying in a meek and yet confiding voice:

"I am thine; do with me as thou seest best!"

"Woman," repeated Magua, hoarsely, and endeavoring in vain to catch a glance from her serene and beaming eye, "choose!"

But Cora neither heard nor heeded his demand. The form of the Huron trembled in every fibre, and he raised his arm on high, but dropped it again with a bewildered air, like one who doubted. Once more he struggled with himself and lifted the keen weapon again; but just then a piercing cry was heard above them, and Uncas appeared, leaping frantically, from a fearful height, upon the ledge. Magua recoiled a step; and one of his assistants, profiting by the chance, sheathed his own knife in the bosom of Cora.

The Huron sprang like a tiger on his offending and already retreating countryman, but the falling form of Uncas separated the unnatural combatants. Diverted from his object by this interruption, and maddened by the murder he had just witnessed, Magua buried his weapon in the back of the prostrate Delaware, uttering an unearthly shout as he committed the dastardly deed. But Uncas arose from the blow, as the wounded panther turns upon his foe, and struck the murderer of Cora to his feet, by an effort in which the last of his failing strength was expended. Then, with a stern and steady look, he turned to Le Subtil, and indicated by the expression of his eye all that he would do had not the power deserted him.

The latter seized the nerveless arm of the unresisting Delaware, and passed his knife into his bosom three several times, before his victim, still keeping his gaze riveted on his enemy, with a look of inextinguishable scorn, fell dead at his feet.

"Mercy! Mercy! Huron," cried Heyward, from above, in tones nearly choked by horror; "give mercy, and thou shalt receive from it!"

Whirling the bloody knife up at the imploring youth, the victorious Magua uttered a cry so fierce, so wild, and yet so joyous, that it conveyed the sounds of savage triumph to the ears of those who fought in the valley, a thousand feet below. He was answered by a burst from the lips of the scout, whose tall person was just then seen moving swiftly toward him, along those dangerous crags, with steps as bold and reckless as if he possessed the power to move in air. But when the hunter reached the scene of the ruthless massacre, the ledge was tenanted only by the dead.

His keen eye took a single look at the victims, and then shot its glances over the difficulties of the ascent in his front. A form stood at the brow of the mountain, on the very edge of the giddy height, with uplifted arms, in an awful attitude of menace. Without stopping to consider his person, the rifle of Hawkeye was raised; but a rock, which fell on the head of one of the fugitives below, exposed the indignant and glowing countenance of the honest Gamut. Then Magua issued from a crevice, and, stepping with calm indifference over the body of the last of his associates, he leaped a wide fissure, and ascended the rocks at a point where the arm of David could not reach him. A single bound would carry him to the brow of the precipice, and assure his safety. Before taking the leap, however, the Huron paused, and shaking his hand at the scout, he shouted:

The pale faces are dogs! The Delaware’s women! Magua leaves them on the rocks, for the crows!

Laughing hoarsely, he made a desperate leap, and fell short of his mark, though his hands grasped a shrub on the verge of the height. The form of Hawkeye had crouched like a beast about to take its spring, and his frame trembled so violently with eagerness that the muzzle of the half-raised rifle played like a leaf fluttering in the wind. Without exhausting himself with fruitless efforts, the cunning Magua suffered his body to drop to the length of his arms, and found a fragment for his feet to rest on. Then, summoning all his powers, he renewed the attempt, and so far succeeded as to draw his knees on the edge of the mountain. It was now, when the body of his enemy was most collected together, that the agitated weapon of the scout was drawn to his shoulder. The surrounding rocks themselves were not steadier than the piece became, for the single instant that it poured out its contents.

The arms of the Huron relaxed, and his body fell back a little, while his knees still kept their position. Turning a relentless look on his enemy, he shook a hand in grim defiance. But his hold loosened, and his dark person was seen cutting the air with its head downward, for a fleeting instant, until it glided past the fringe of shrubbery which clung to the mountain, in its rapid flight to destruction.

## Justifying Cora Munro’s Death: Social Usefulness

in James Fenimore Cooper’s The Last of the Mohicans

In James Fenimore Cooper’s fiction, ‘women are of central social significance. [Cooper’s] theme is society, and he defines women as the nexus of social interaction,’ Nina Baym argues[i]. She claims that the author is not interested in women’s personhood or individuality, but rather in their usefulness for society. According to Baym, matrimony is ‘the chief “statement” of the social language’.[ii] Therefore, if a woman is apt for marriage, she is socially utile. One of the main aspects of The Last of the Mohicans is the dichotomy between the half-sisters Cora and Alice Munro, to whom the concept of social usefulness can be applied. On the one hand, Fenimore Cooper presents Alice, who is fair, helpless and infantile, as marriageable. On other hand, Cora, the dark, courageous and initiated sister, is considered unsuitable for wifehood. Instead of letting Cora be united in marriage with the Indian Uncas in the end of the novel, the author decides to kill both of them. Many of his contemporaries have urged Cooper to change the unhappy ending. One critic, for instance, writes:

Every event as we go along points to a favourable termination, when just at the winding up, the design seems to be capriciously reversed, and [Cora and Uncas] are most summarily and unnecessarily disposed of. The vessel, having braved all the dangers of her voyage, sinks as she is floating into smooth water.[iii]

James Fenimore Cooper, however, ignored such criticism and kept his original ending. Nevertheless, the issue of Cora’s death is still open to controversy. This essay will explain why, to the author, killing his heroine was preferable to letting her marry either Major Heyward or Uncas. The composition will achieve this task by, first of all, comparing Cora to her sister Alice. It will furthermore focus on Baym’s concept of social usefulness in the light of gender expectations of 18th and 19th century America and attitudes towards race. Finally, Cooper’s opinion on multiracialism in the New World will be examined.

To begin with, Cora and Alice’s outward appearance and racial background will be discussed. In The Last of the Mohicans, Cooper introduces his readers to a duality of a dark and a light heroine. Describing the sisters in detail in the first chapter, Cooper praises about Alice’s ‘dazzling complexion, fair golden hair, and bright blue eyes’ and points out that she looks very young.[iv] In contrast to this, Cora whose face is at first hidden behind a veil, looks ‘fuller and more mature’ (9). When the fabric opens its folds, the reader gets a first glimpse of Cora’s blackness. ‘Her complexion was not brown, but it rather appeared charged with the colour of the rich blood that seemed ready to burst its bounds,’ Cooper describes (9). Nevertheless, Cora is by no means uglier than her sister. Cooper remarks: ‘And yet there was neither coarseness nor want of shadowing in a countenance that was exquisitely regular and dignified, and surpassingly beautiful’ (9). At this point, the reader is left to wonder about Cora and Alice’s diametrically opposite looks. It is the girls’ father, Colonel Munro, who accounts for the truth when he feels insulted by Major Heyward’s preference of Alice to Cora. Munro explains that when living in the West Indies, he formed

‘a connection with one who in time became [his] wife and the mother of Cora. She was the daughter of a gentleman of those isles, by a lady whose misfortune it was … to be descended remotely from that unfortunate class who are so basely enslaved to administer to the wants of a luxurious people’ (146).

Cora’s mother, he admits, was partly black and passed on her racial impurity to her daughter. After the death of his first wife, the Colonel returned home to Scotland and remarried. He tells Heyward that his second wife, Alice’s mother, was ‘the only child of a neighbouring laird of some estate’ and consequently makes clear that she was as racially pure, that is, white, as he himself is (146).

Even though their racial background explains why Cora and Alice look different, it does not provide an explanation for their dichotomous character traits. In contrast to Alice, Cora displays courage and self-reliance throughout the novel. For example, in Chapter 8, when the group is encircled by the Iroquois, Cora knows that she herself cannot escape. However, instead of fainting and sobbing like her younger sister, Cora stays calm and insists that the men attempt to flee. ‘… [T]ry the river,’ she suggests, ‘Why linger, to add to the number of the victims of our merciless enemies?’ (68). She instructs the men to try to reach Colonel Munro as quickly as possible and ask for his assistance, and then adds:

‘…if, after all, it should please Heaven that his assistance come too late, bear to him … the love, the blessings, the final prayers of his daughters, and bid him not mourn their early fate, but to look forward with humble confidence to the Christian’s goal to meet his children.’ (68)

Cora’s Christian faith and her maturity give her the strength to act rationally in the face of danger. She also trusts in her own ability to judge any situation adequately and to find a way of dealing with it. Alice, on the other hand, only knows one way of coping with peril: hoping that someone else, preferably a white man, saves her. Alice’s weakness is, in fact, her most prominent character trait. She sobs, cries and faints innumerable times throughout the novel. ‘Alice’s extreme passivity constantly endangers her and her companions,’ Nina Baym writes.[v] Untrained for survival in the wilderness, Alice is ‘helpless, dependent, and infantile.’[vi]

The fact that the girls are opposed in character as well as racial background explains why only one of them is labelled marriageable. However, modern readers of The Last of the Mohicans may find it paradoxical that it is Alice whom Cooper considers socially useful, and not Cora. To illustrate this, from a contemporary point of view, Cora is far superior to her sister. The traits that she possesses are, today, very desirable in a woman. Her intelligence and eloquence are as remarkable as her activeness and courage. Nevertheless, Heyward, who ‘functions in the novel as the reader’s surrogate,’ prefers Alice to Cora[vii]. Why does Heyward, why would any man, prefer the weaker, childish sister, the one who constantly faints and sobs? Is it, as Heyward himself claims, because of ‘the sweetness, the beauty, the witchery’ of Alice (147)? It is necessary for a thorough analysis of the novel to consider 18th as well as early 19th century gender roles – the novel is set in 1757, but was published in 1826 - and to examine in how far Cora and Alice fulfil the expectations of their times.

The society that Cooper depicts in the Leatherstocking tales in The Last of the Mohicans is dominated by men and strongly patriarchal. Women are at best marginal figures whose individuality is of no particular importance. They are seen as objects rather than persons. Men consider women priceless and fragile possessions that need to be protected at all costs. Therefore, it is Alice who ‘fulfils the implicit definition of a lovable woman.’ [viii] She clings to Heyward with the dependency of a helpless, innocent child. As Baym puts it,

A white man does not need a woman fighting by his side, to inspire him, still less a woman mediating between him and the Indian enemy; he needs a woman to fight for and to fight about. White women best serve the white nation by sacrificing their dangerous dreams of independent selfhood, reining their sexual fantasies, and recognizing that they are most useful to civilization as protected possessions of white men. [ix]

This statement also explains why Cora neither matches the gender expectations of the 18th century nor those of a 19th-century readership. She is too independent, too eloquent, too strong willed and too self-reliant. In fact, she crosses gender boundaries throughout the novel by acting wisely and rationally in the face of imminent danger instead of begging for the protection and help of her male companions. To the male characters of The Last of the Mohicans, Cora’s character traits are threatening. If manhood is predicated on the successful defence of white women, no masculine character will marry a woman who embodies virtues such as courage, firmness and self-reliance. The fact that Cora is relatively independent endangers the concept of manhood of a society in which men are valued for their skill at rescuing or protecting the weaker sex, and in which ‘this skill is an important source of … pride and self-respect’[x]. In short, Cora’s refusal to conform to gender norms and expectations makes her socially useless for white man, that is, inapt for matrimony.
